=== Paper 1 ===
SemanticOn: Specifying Content-Based Semantic Conditions for

Figure 1: The workflow of SemanticOn. There are three steps to creating a web automation program with semantic conditions using
SemanticOn. (Step 1) To specify semantic conditions, users can either describe their intent in text (User Enters, ○c ) or indicate the section of
interest by brushing through an image ○a or highlighting parts of a text ○b (System Suggests). SemanticOn then encodes these specifications
with computer vision and natural language processing techniques into web program conditions. (Step 2) To create the intended web
automation program, users demonstrate the actions on the website using WebRobot, including image downloading ○d and text scraping ○e .
(Step 3) Once the program is executed, users can also easily coordinate with SemanticOn to refine the semantic conditions (○f , ○h ) or take
back control to add or remove data manually ○g .
ABSTRACT
Data scientists, researchers, and clerks often create web automation
programs to perform repetitive yet essential tasks, such as data
scraping and data entry. However, existing web automation systems lack mechanisms for defining conditional behaviors where
the system can intelligently filter candidate content based on semantic filters (e.g., extract texts based on key ideas or images based
on entity relationships). We introduce SemanticOn, a system that
enables users to specify, refine, and incorporate visual and textual
semantic conditions in web automation programs via two methods:
natural language description via prompts or information highlighting. Users can coordinate with SemanticOn to refine the conditions
as the program continuously executes or reclaim manual control
to repair errors. In a user study, participants completed a series of
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM
must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish,
to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a
fee. 

conditional web automation tasks. They reported that SemanticOn
helped them effectively express and refine their semantic intent by
utilizing visual and textual conditions.

1 INTRODUCTION
Enterprises, governments, and schools often use web-based applications to manage their businesses and services. Other than
information consumption, users such as clerks, data scientists, and
researchers often employ these web platforms to conduct tasks that
are repetitive yet essential, such as data scraping and data entry.
Performing these tasks manually can often lead to human errors
(e.g., data duplicates, missed entries), which can cause inefficiencies.
Web automation offers a solution that leverages bots to mimic human interactions on web applications. It assists users with tedious
and recurring tasks and has proven to be faster and more accurate
for various task types compared to manual effort.
Past research has developed techniques to help users of all expertise levels to quickly and accurately create their intended web
automation programs. However, these techniques
are limited to creating programs with requirements at the website
syntax or structural level (e.g., scraping the first two items in each
row of a table). Tools capable of creating logic based on the meaning of the content (semantics) remain unexplored. For instance,
commercial tools such as iMacros and UiPath enable users
to perform record-and-replay interactions for web automation and
testing. Research tools such as Helena further this technique by
lowering the learning curve, allowing users with little programming
experience to create complex programs that can handle hierarchical
data (e.g., tree-structured data) and distributed data spread across
multiple websites.
We identified a need for web automation with semantic conditions through prior user studies and analysis of real user
requests in online forms. This includes vision-related semantic conditions, such as scraping images that meet specific criteria
(e.g., a photography student wants to study group interaction portraits on a gallery website with thousands of photos) or text-related
semantic conditions, such as scraping text only when it expresses
particular sentiments (e.g., a film critic wants to evaluate positive
reviews of a movie star’s acting from dozens of news articles in
a journal). With current techniques, users cannot specify these
semantic intents in web automation programs. As noted above,
semantic information often varies by content type, which makes
it hard to design a universal interaction that is both easy to use
and sufficiently expressive. Additionally, unlike other AI systems
that provide results immediately after the provision of user inputs
(e.g., chatbots), once executed, a web automation program will
continuously output results as it iterates over web contents. This
makes monitoring and error handling difficult, as the program may
encounter unforeseen and problematic cases.
This paper explores interactive techniques to enable contentbased semantic condition specification for web automation programs. We introduce SemanticOn,1
a system that allows users to
specify, refine, and incorporate visual and textual semantic information as conditions in web automation programs via two methods:
natural language description via prompts or detailed information
highlighting with system support. We define them as User Enters
and System Suggests, respectively. SemanticOn combines the relative strengths of neural models (Transformer) for unstructured
information and program synthesis techniques for web automation.
By doing so, we introduce a new interaction paradigm for users to
continuously add/refine semantic conditions in a programming-bydemonstration system. Specifically, SemanticOn builds upon WebRobot, a program synthesis system that enables users to create
web automation programs by demonstrating actions on the target
websites. WebRobot employs a no-code development approach that
requires only web interactions in place of programming knowledge
from users, which is consistent with our design goal.
SemanticOn is an acronym for semantic condition
Figure 1 depicts the three steps of using SemanticOn. (Step 1) To
specify semantic conditions, users can either describe their intent
in a sentence, indicate their area of interest by brushing
through an image, or highlight parts of a text.
SemanticOn uses similarity-based computer vision and natural language processing techniques to encode these specifications into
web program conditions. (Step 2) To create the intended web automation program, users will demonstrate actions on the website
using WebRobot, including image downloading (Fig. 1.d) and text
scraping. (Step 3) Once the program is executed, users
can also easily coordinate with SemanticOn to refine the semantic
conditions based on the automatically detected information (Fig. 1.f,
Fig. 1.h) or reclaim control to manually add or remove data if the
program has misjudged (Fig. 1.g). To our knowledge, SemanticOn
is the first system to explore content-based semantic specification
interactions for web automation programs.
We conducted a user study with 10 participants to evaluate
SemanticOn’s overall usability and efficiency and to compare the
semantic condition specification of each method (User Enters and
System Suggests). We found that participants using SemanticOn
successfully extracted 80.8% of the required data with an average
time of 06:10 minute:second per task. The participants found that
SemanticOn helped them effectively express their semantic intent
by prompting them to consider their visual and textual perceptions
of the tasks. We found a sense of control vs. effort trade-off, where
participants enjoyed composing their conditions in User Enters but
had to spend more time and mental effort devising a description
to encapsulate the semantic condition. On the other hand, while
participants could specify and refine conditions more easily via
highlighting content details and selecting generated conditions in
System Suggests, they had less freedom to express their intent when
system suggestions were inaccurate.
In the final section of this work, we analyze the human-AI collaboration workflow in SemanticOn, discuss the implications of adding
similarity-based models in a symbolic PBD system, and explore
future work that can adapt our approach to other types of interactive AI systems that require semantic conditions. This work is an
essential step towards the vision of natural, intent-unambiguous
end-user programming with a focus on web automation creation.
This paper makes the following contributions:
• The User Enters, System Suggests interaction designs, implementations, and evaluations that allow users to specify and
demonstrate their intent during web automation creation,
• The refinement and error-handling techniques to clarify and
improve semantic filters in a continuous human-AI collaboration process,
• SemanticOn, along with a user study showing its usability
and effectiveness in helping users specify semantic conditions for web automation programs.
2 RELATED WORK
SemanticOn builds on decades of web automation systems and
innovations. In this section, we draw our design goals and guidance from three areas of work: web automation, programming-bydemonstration, and user intent specification and refinement.
2.1 Web Automation
Web automation is a software technique that leverages bots to
perform tedious and recurring web tasks by mimicking human
interactions, such as data entry and data extraction. Data scientists,
UI testers, and clerks all use web automation to help complete
their domain-specific tasks. Social scientists, for
example, might want to develop web data scraping programs to
collect necessary web datasets. UI testers might want to create an
automated browser testing program to help developers find frontend defects. Data workers might envision a data entry program
for routine tasks like entering large amounts of data into a digital
system (e.g., booking flights for all employees).
Creating web automation programs is a non-trivial and complex
task. Many web automation tools require users to have domain
knowledge (e.g., understand the Document Object Model (DOM)
structure) and programming experience. Commonly used tools like
Puppeteer, Selenium, Scrapy, and Beautiful Soup
require users to learn code syntax, understand the task content
architecture (e.g., DOM tree hierarchy), and have software testing experience. Prior work has shown that even for professional
developers, creating automation programs is time-consuming. Krosnick and Oney studied the challenges of writing web macros using
common web automation frameworks for experienced programmers. They found that a primary challenge for participants
was the labor of checking syntactical element selectors to create
their programs, which was inefficient and prone to mistakes. In
addition, the program might not generalize to cross-webpage selections where the elements don’t have syntactic similarity. Our
work enables users to specify the semantic meaning of their target
content, bypassing the issues caused by implementation.
Researchers have developed many helpful tools to reduce the
effort of program creation. For desktop application automation, systems like Sikuli allow users to identify a GUI element (e.g., an
icon or a toolbar button) by taking its screenshot. Using computer vision techniques, it analyzes patterns in the screenshots to locate the
appropriate elements when automating GUI interactions. Although
this approach is promising, it requires programming knowledge
and cannot disambiguate similar elements or text information. For
UI testing, researchers have proposed and studied crowdsourcing
and automated testing strategies to help increase the testing coverage and reduce the effort of creating programs. While
helpful, outputs produced with these tools are hard to generalize
to new UIs or contexts.
2.2 Programming-by-Demonstration
To further reduce the expertise required, many tools have used
a programming-by-demonstration (PBD) approach where users
only have to interact with the target applications rather than writing code. These span a variety of application domains
including text manipulation, image or video editing, and GUI synthesis. In the context
of web applications, PBD delivers on this first design requirement,
offering web automation without requiring users to understand
browser internals or manually reverse-engineer target pages. The
PBD approach has produced great successes in the web automation
domain, most notably CoScripter, Vegemite, Rousillon,
and iMacros.
Some of these systems require users to edit their traces to add
parametrization. For instance, CoScripter and iMacros offer recordand-replay functionality; users record themselves interacting with
the browser—clicking, entering text, and navigating between pages—
and the tool writes a loop-free script that replays the recorded
interaction. Because they lack support for control constructs and
function composition, these systems require users to have logic
skills. Other systems support iteration using program synthesis,
automatically discovering loops given a demonstration of one or
a few iterations. While less domain knowledge is needed, the synthesizer can make mistakes in which the user must provide more
demonstrations or edit the DSL to correct it (e.g., Helena), which
can be frustrating. SemanticOn instead allows users to effectively
coordinate with PBD systems by smoothly switching agency and
editing constraints at any time during program execution.
2.3 User Intent Specification and Refinement
User intent specification is an important and challenging component of human-AI collaboration. Ideally, users should be able to
easily and naturally specify their intent to a system while understanding its states. However, given the limited capabilities of AI
understanding techniques, high-level user intent can be difficult
for systems to comprehend. Many systems have proposed bridging the gap between user intent and system understanding. For
instance, PLOW and PUMICE allow users to express concepts (e.g., hot weather) in natural language and then learn the
concepts to generalize the automation. Systems like Scout,
Designscape [64], and Iconate allow users to iteratively refine
their intent by directly manipulating the AI-generated artifacts.
Other studies have shown that this refinement interaction can even
be delegated to crowd workers. Another work, APPINITE,
also encapsulates user’s intent in natural language instructions
and clarifies the intention in a back-and-forth conversation with
the AI. While these approaches are promising, user intents can
involve visual and cognitive details such as identifying visual relationships in images or parsing texts to match a high-level idea.
The user’s semantic level intents are often not fully or accurately
expressed through natural language or limited examples only, leading to information loss during communication and rendering the
communication ineffective.
Similar to PBD systems, programming-by-example (PBE) is another approach to facilitate program creation for various tasks such
as data wrangling and data visualization. Many
PBE and PBD systems require users to provide additional examples
to disambiguate user intent. Falx allows users to specify visualization examples using a small amount of data and then infers and
transforms the data to match the design. Sporq allows users
to more accurately and quickly search code patterns in large codebases by prompting them to refine their intent by annotating a
batch of negative examples and adding specific constraints.
Other works enable users to directly annotate their input examples
(augmented examples) to disambiguate user intent. Or they
employ data visualization techniques to showcase the generated
programs, allowing users to tweak the path of program generation in a tree view. While promising, providing additional
examples increases users’ cognitive demand. In this work, we focus
on addressing the ambiguous semantic conditions and designing
human-AI collaboration interaction solutions to help refine the
constraints based on the content.
Using machine learning (ML) models to refine intent has been a
recent focus in the field of interactive ML. One common interactive
ML approach allows users to offer feedback during the model training process for more effective ML model creation [16]. Work by Cai
et al. allows users to adjust the search algorithm iteratively with
different types of similarities at different moments [14]. Projects
by Austin et al. and Jiang et al. allow users to interact with large
language models to help refine their intent when writing code
snippets. Work by Amershi et al. allows users to identify
new friend groups on social media by analyzing the examples presented. Software developed by Fogarty et al. helps users to
create their own rules to improve the search results. This research inspires our work, but instead, we focus on helping users
refine their intent while interacting with continuous AI systems—
web automation programs that require constant monitoring and
that effectively coordinate the turn-taking.
3 BACKGROUND AND DESIGN GOALS
Our work is built upon an existing web automation system, WebRobot, that only uses web interactions and requires no programming knowledge from its users. This is consistent with our
design goal. In addition to prior work, we derive our design goals
from WebRobot’s user study. In this section, we provide necessary
background information on the WebRobot system and then discuss
the design goals for our system SemanticOn.
Figure 2: A screenshot of the WebRobot system UI.
3.1 The WebRobot System Workflow
WebRobot is designed to facilitate web automation program creation. Figure 2 shows the WebRobot user interface. To create a
web automation program for a data entry or scraping task, a user
first starts recording their actions (Fig. 2.a). Then they can either
upload a JSON file (Fig. 2.b) if the task involves data entry, or they
can choose an appropriate action (e.g., Scrape Text) in the action
panel (Fig. 2.c) and perform the required actions (e.g., clicking the
desired text data on the website). After each scraping action, they
will see the data appended to the output panel (Fig. 2.d). Behind
the scenes, WebRobot records every user action on the website and
its associated action type (e.g., Scrape Text). After a few demonstrations, WebRobot synthesizes a program P from the trace A of
demonstrated actions. In particular, WebRobot guarantees that P
not only reproduces the demonstrated actions from A but also generalizes beyond A. This typically implies P would contain loops that
can be used to automate the user-intended task. Finally, WebRobot
executes P to automate the rest of the actions in the task.
procedure
Algorithm 1: Rewrite-based program synthesis algorithm.
3.2 WebRobot’s Synthesis Algorithm
In a nutshell, WebRobot’s synthesis algorithm (Algorithm 1) generalizes an input action trace A into a program P (with loops) by
iteratively rewriting A to loops in P from the inside out. Initially, it
creates a program P0 with exactly those actions in A (line 1): while
P0 reproduces A, it does not generalize A (i.e., it does not produce
new actions after A). Therefore, the algorithm performs iterative
rewriting to gradually “compress” P0 into more compact and general programs using a worklist algorithm (lines 2-8). The worklist
W is initialized to have only P0, and we use Peto keep track of all
programs that generalize A (line 2). WheneverW is not empty (line
3), the algorithm would remove a program P fromW (line 4). It then
checks to see whether P generalizes A; if so, P is added to Pe(line
5). After this, in line 6, the algorithm tries to rewrite P into more
general programs, which are stored inW ′
. The key idea underlying
our Rewrite procedure is to perform semantic rewriting using a
methodology called speculate-and-rewrite. Intuitively, it inspects P,
identifies repetitive patterns in P, hypothesizes potential loops that
correspond to P, and finally synthesizes programs with one more
level of loop. How WebRobot’s speculative writing process works
is beyond the scope of this work; we refer interested readers to the
original WebRobot paper [24] for details. Once P is rewritten to a
new set of programs W ′
(line 6), the algorithm simply merges W ′
into W (line 7). The worklist loop terminates when no programs
can be rewritten and it finally returns the smallest program in Pe
using a ranking function (line 8).
3.3 User Feedback
In WebRobot’s user study, participants reported that while WebRobot can help lower barriers of entry for the creation of web
automation programs and handling a more comprehensive range
of tasks, they wished that they could express conditions to filter the
content. For instance, one participant said, “maybe some conditional
scraping [can be included], not based on whether the element exists
in the webpage, but based on some other conditions.” Consistently,
we found posts on forums such as iMacros [3] and Stack Overflow [7] that request the creation of web automation programs with
content-based conditions. Participants also wished to refine their
intent when interacting with the WebRobot system. For instance,
participants reported that they wanted to “undo my wrong manipulations” or “edit my history.” However, as noted in the related work,
WebRobot and other systems do not effectively support actions
such as undo or history manipulation.
3.4 Design Goals
Based on this prior work, we devised the following three design
goals to help users easily create web automation programs with
semantic conditions.
• DG1: Ability to express content-based semantic conditions: Users can specify semantic conditions when creating
web automation programs.
• DG2: Accessible user intent refinement: Users can iteratively refine their semantic conditions at any time of the
program creation process.
• DG3: Responsive error handling for mistakes made by
users and the system: Users need to modify inaccurate
conditions and edit scraped data easily.
ML models WebRobot
1. Specify conditions 2. Demonstrate
3. Intent refinement
Final web automation
program
Semantic filters Synthesized program
Figure 3: SemanticOn’s system architecture.
4 SEMANTICON
With the three design goals above, we created SemanticOn to help
users specify, refine, and incorporate semantic conditions in automated web data scraping. Figure 3 shows SemanticOn’s system
architecture and main user interactions at a high level. Instead of
writing web macros from scratch for each website and filtering the
scraped content in post-processing, users can interact with SemanticOn to compose semantic conditions on the content they want
to scrape (Step 1 Fig. 3), then demonstrate actions on the target
website to synthesize automation programs for different websites
without writing a single line of code (Step 2 Fig. 3). Throughout this
process, users can communicate with SemanticOn, which is capable
of parsing text and image content through machine learning models.
The users and SemanticOn work together to refine the condition
set and repair errors in result selection, continuously improving
both the system’s and user’s understanding of the filter criteria
(Step 3 in Fig. 3). In this section, we first illustrate SemanticOn’s
user experience with a sample scenario that embodies common
semantic conditions. We then detail the design and implementation
of SemanticOn.
4.1 The SemanticOn User Experience
Mia, an outdoor enthusiast, wants to extract online information
about travel destinations where outdoor activities are available. To
help her make an informed decision, Mia wants to scrape the text
description and the image for each location from an article to build
potential itineraries. One option is to read through every paragraph,
look at each picture, and manually copy and paste the relevant information, but that process would be tedious and repetitive. On the
other hand, Mia could write a web scraping script using Python. She
has some coding experience, but writing a script and filtering the
results based on her preference would also be time-consuming and
laborious. Instead, Mia uses SemanticOn to efficiently demonstrate
her conditions and web actions and synthesize a web automation
program that completes the task for her.
To begin, Mia sets the semantic conditions for the intended
content (Step 1 Fig.3). She first clicks “Text Condition”. She then
selects User Enters (Fig. 4.d) to specify the semantic condition in her
own words. Mia represents her high-level requirement in the system
prompt by typing, “This is a great location for outdoor activities”
(Fig. 6.c). She believes this sentence is likely semantically similar
to the relevant content in this article. After clicking “Add”, the
condition is appended to the text condition table (Fig. 4.h) in the
condition panel. Furthermore, Mia decides to add a condition to
the corresponding destination image. She wants to travel to a place
where hiking and water activities are accessible. To that end, she
uses System Suggests, clicks on an ideal image, and highlights the
mountain and lake in the picture (Fig. 6.a). The system detects
several objects and summarizes the image content into a sentence.
Mia also adds the relevant objects and caption to the corresponding
tables (Fig. 4.f,g) in the condition panel.
After specifying two initial conditions, Mia decides to start the
demonstration process (Step 2, Fig.3). She clicks the “Start Recording” button (Fig. 4.a) to start the web macro recording for program
synthesis. Then, Mia specifies the task name as “Travel Destination
Search” and sets the column number to 2, one for text descriptions
and one for the associated images.
Next, Mia selects “Download Image” and hovers the mouse to
highlight the desired image element (Fig. 4.j). As she clicks on the
element, the image is downloaded and put into the first column
Figure 4: Overview of SemanticOn’s user interface. The user begins program synthesis by clicking Start Recording ○a . The user can
disable or enable system suggested prompts in automation ○b . The user can specify conditions for images or text ○c and choose between
manually input or select system-suggested conditions ○d . The user can also toggle between OR and AND logic for the condition set ○e .
A unique table displays image object conditions ○f , image description conditions ○g , and text description conditions ○h . The user may
pause ○i at any time to make changes that will not affect automation. To interact with the web page and demonstrate actions for program
synthesis, the user will select their action type by choosing an option in the action panel ○j . The system will predict the next action, shown
in the temporary row ○k . If the semantic conditions are met, the temporary row will be appended to the output panel ○l . To learn more
about how the content match with the conditions, the user may click on the information icon ○m.
of the Temporary Row (Fig. 4.k). SemanticOn evaluates conditions
associated with each column before the row is added to the output
panel or skipped. However, at the demonstration stage, the condition will not be triggered, as we assume users will only demonstrate
macro actions on the content they want to include. Mia then selects
the “Scrape Text” action and repeats the steps for the destination
description. As both columns in the temporary row are filled, the
entire row is added to the output panel (Fig. 4.l).
Figure 5: Example of system prompt when new content does
not match with current condition.
Mia repeats her demonstration for a second destination that fits
her requirement. After two rows of user demonstration, WebRobot
can synthesize the web automation program and predict the user’s
next step, so the system now enters a guided semi-automation
mode. SemanticOn scrolls into the next row of the destination and
highlights the next element to be extracted. For the image, a prompt
states that the generated caption matched with the initial image
condition “a lake beneath the mountain range”. Mia confirms this
selection and lets SemanticOn continue. However, Mia finds that
her initial text condition is too general, as the system informs her
the text condition does not match the current text and presents
key phrases from this element to be potentially used as refinement
(Fig.5). She realizes that “scenic hiking trails” would be a good
textual condition to include. She also discovers “pet travel” as a key
phrase. Mia would love to take her dog Sushi on the trip, so she also
selects that key phrase. After she clicks “Finish,” those two phrases
are added to the text condition table, and the highlighted text is
considered accepted.
After inspecting several elements in semi-automation mode and
refining the condition set with system prompts, Mia feels satisfied
with the system’s interpretation of her requirements. She clicks on
the “Hide Prompt” button (Fig. 4.b) to allow the system to automatically predict and filter the rest of the web page content without
stopping for user confirmation. Mia sits back and waits for the
program to finish. However, she notices that for one destination,
“Grand Canyon, USA,” the system filters the image as it does not
match “a lake beneath the mountain range”. However, she actually
wants to include this destination in her list, as she can still engage in
outdoor activities such as hiking and kayaking. To repair this error,
Figure 6: Two condition specification methods in SemanticOn. After entering the system suggests mode, the user may draw on images.
Then, a prompt ○a containing detected objects within that region, and a general description of the image will be shown. Similarly, the user
may highlight sections of text, and the system will prompt ○b important key phrases within the highlighted portion. Users may manually
enter conditions by clicking on an image or section of text and entering their conditions ○c .
Mia pauses the automation process (Fig. 4.i, 7.b). She then manually
scrapes the text description and downloads the image using the
action panel (Fig. 4.j). It’s worth noting that during the pause, Mia’s
web macros are not used for program synthesis and therefore do
not affect the current automation program. Mia also adds another
image condition using User Enters, specifying “a canyon valley with
river” as another instance of her ideal destination. While the program is paused, Mia scrolls through, evaluates the output panel,
and can delete output rows that were added by system mistake or
modify/delete conditions during the pause (Fig. 7.d). After she is
satisfied with the refined condition set and the current results, Mia
clicks “Resume” to continue the automation. The program iterates
through the rest of the web page and collects filtered data based on
Mia’s semantic conditions. After the program ends, Mia stops the
web macro recording, and the collected results are exported as a
JSON file. Mia uses SemanticOn to create a tailored web automation
program without writing any code. She also obtains a high-accuracy
result set of her ideal travel destinations by continuously working
with SemanticOn to clarify and refine conditions and repair errors.
4.2 Design and Implementation
We implemented SemanticOn as a Chrome browser extension, incorporating the core program synthesis engine from an existing system, WebRobot. Primarily, it uses plain JavaScript for the front-end
interactions. For semantic condition comprehension, we adopted
two off-the-shelf Transformer models.
4.2.1 Step 1: Specify Semantic Conditions. To enable content-based
semantic conditions specification (DG1), SemanticOn allows users
to add condition criteria to specific content on the target website.
Currently, the system supports conditions on text and image content
(Fig. 4.c). The user can choose one of the two methods of specification: 1) User Enters, where the user composes the condition using
natural language, or 2) System Suggests, a novel specification technique where the user highlights relevant content for SemanticOn to
analyze and provide suggested conditions (Fig. 4.d). Upon selecting
the type of condition and the specification method, the user chooses
an element on the web page as the basis of the semantic condition.
Inspired by recent prompt-based interactions, a prompt
displays next to the selected text or image element for User Enters,
encouraging the user to enter a semantic description of their search
criteria (Fig. 6.c). This description, along with the context of the text
or image element, is added to the conditional panel on SemanticOn
(Fig. 4.f,g,h). In comparison, for System Suggests, the user needs to
highlight the crucial part of the content to set the condition on.
For images, the user brushes over an area of interest with their
mouse (Fig. 6.a) to illustrate. The image is fed through an off-theshelf pre-trained multi-layer Transformer model that learns to
align image-level tags with their corresponding image region features. The model detects objects for the illustrated section
and generates a caption for the entire image. For texts, the user
highlights relevant phrases or sentences with their mouse (Fig. 6.b).
Similarly, the text is processed by an off-the-shelf unsupervised
language model where the noun phrases in the input text are first
detected and then ranked based on frequency and co-occurrence.
The model generates key phrases in the passage highlighted by the
user. The user can then pick any object, caption, or phrase tags
to add to the condition table (Fig. 4.f,g,h). We used these models
through the Microsoft Azure Cognitive Services and Cloud platform.2 Guided by the design of other systems, we also
implemented edit, delete, and logical operations for multiple condition specifications, allowing the user to modify, remove, or set
the AND/OR logic switch on the conditions (Fig. 4.e). They can also
apply the condition to one or all of the output columns.
4.2.2 Step 2: Demonstrate Actions and Automate. Once the user
sets initial conditions, they can start the demonstration process by
clicking “Start Recording” (Fig. 4.a). This initializes the WebRobot
2Microsoft Azure
Figure 7: SemanticOn Error Repair Workflow. A user wants to download cute pictures of a cat and a dog cuddling, but they notice a
photo of two cats is being scraped by mistake ○a . The user pauses the system ○b . Then, the user can edit the condition description, delete
conditions ○c , and delete the incorrectly scraped result ○d .
system on the current web page. The user can then select one of
the three actions under the action panel: Scrape Text, Download
Image, and Normal (Fig. 4.j). The Scrape Text and Download Image
actions allow users to click on the desired text or image element and
extract the information into the table in output panel. In contrast,
the Normal action allows the user to navigate and paginate the web
page. For example, the user can use Normal to click into a web page,
use Scrape Text to extract a passage, and switch back to Normal to
return to the previous page. WebRobot registers this entire sequence
of web macros and generates an automation program to repeat it.
After the user demonstrates their intended pattern of actions
twice, WebRobot generates an automation program and predicts
the next action. SemanticOn also enters a guided semi-automation
mode. That is, for every data extraction action predicted, the system
parses the content through machine learning models. A new image
is considered matching with the current conditions if 1) an object
specified in the image condition is detected (e.g. user specified a
dog, and the new image consists of a human petting a dog), or 2)
the new caption yields a similarity score above a certain threshold
when compared with captions specified in the image condition. The
image caption and text content similarity thresholds were set to 0.5
and 0.4, respectively, based on our benchmark testing. A new text is
considered matching if it yields a similarity score above a threshold
when compared with specified text conditions. We used a SentenceTransformer to calculate the semantic similarity between captions
and texts. The model utilizes Sentence-BERT (SBERT), a pretrained network that derives semantically meaningful sentence
embeddings that can be compared using cosine-similarity. To avoid
the low-score comparison between an entire paragraph and a key
phrase, we chunk the text content and conditions into sentences
and see if any pair results in a high similarity score.
4.2.3 Step 3: Refine, Repair, and Coordinate. To help users easily
refine their intent (DG2) and repair mistakes (DG3), we adopted
the human-in-the-loop approach and introduced a semiautomation mode to ease the transition between manual demonstration and full system automation. First, to repair unexpected
results or conditions, SemanticOn offers users a program pause
function, which is important and unique in continuous AI systems.
In the semi-automation mode, if new text or image content matches
with the condition set, the user is notified by a prompt informing
them which part of the content was matched. In contrast, if the new
content is ambiguous or does not match with the condition set, the
user is prompted with a set of suggested conditions (objects and
captions for images, key phrases for text) generated by ML model
processing (Fig. 5). The user can clarify their intent by selecting
suggested conditions to append to the condition set. The new content will be accepted and added to the output results. Alternatively,
the user can reject the system’s prediction by clicking “Finish”,
in which case the condition set remains unchanged, and the new
content is discarded. The semi-automation mode guides the user
through condition specification and refinement. The user might
begin with a high-level idea of their search query but can refine
and adjust it upon seeing SemanticOn’s interpretation of the result.
The user can add new conditions to cover unforeseen cases or to
modify/delete vague or over-specified conditions that filter results
in an unintended way.
After going through predicted content, administering decisions,
and refining conditions, the user might feel satisfied with the set of
conditions. In that case, the user can choose to hide system prompts
for rejected content and enter full automation. In this mode,
SemanticOn continuously executes the predicted web macros and
assesses each new piece of content, outputting the information
accordingly. This is done by adding a condition evaluation step
after executing every macro before extracting the data. However,
when the user detects a filtering error, they can use the “Pause
Automation” button to reclaim manual control. When the
system is paused, the user is free to modify the output result table.
For each assessed piece of output, an information icon is displayed
at the end of the table cell. Once clicked, it will expand
and display the ML processing results for that content. The user can
repair system-made errors by deleting rows of ambiguous results
accepted by the system but misaligned with the user’s mental model. They can also manually use the action panel to add content
rejected by the system but matches the user’s needs. In addition,
the user can learn from the filtering results to add new conditions
they omitted or under-specified. Likewise, condition editing and
deletion are also available during the pause (Fig. 7.c). This way,
the user can feel confident about the automatic selection of results,
as they always have the power to reclaim manual control, repair
system mistakes, and clarify their intents. Note that during pause,
none of these steps are recorded for program synthesis and do not
affect the automation program.
5 SYSTEM EVALUATION
We conducted an in-person user study to evaluate SemanticOn’s
usability and compare the two methods for condition specifications.
This evaluation was guided by the usage evaluation in the HCI
toolkit evaluation strategy classification.
5.1 Participants
We recruited 10 people (5F5M, mean age 24.3, mean coding experience 4.6 years) at a large public university. Participants are denoted
as P1-P10 in subsequent sections. Seven of the participants were
graduate students, and three were undergraduates. Five participants have written web automation programs or used commercial
tools to some extent. The participants were contacted by email to
participate in a study where they would interact with computer
software to create web automation programs.
5.2 Study Design
After signing our consent form, each participant first watched a
tutorial video of SemanticOn’s interface and features. Then participants performed five tasks using SemanticOn. For each task,
they were given a task sheet with a semantic conditional intent.
Similar to the posted tasks in online forums, the descriptions were
intentionally vague, so the user could not copy the instructions
verbatim and would need to formalize their own idea of how to
specify and refine the conditions. The participants could request the
experimenter’s assistance at any time during the session. After the
participants completed the tasks, we conducted a short interview
with them regarding their experience. Additionally, they filled out
a short survey with Likert scale and short-answer questions when
they exited. The participants were compensated $25 for their time.
Each session took 60-75 minutes and was conducted in person on
our machine. All sessions were screen- and audio-recorded. Our
study is approved by the IRB at our institution.
5.3 Tasks
Through an analysis of online web scraping request posts from
iMacros Forum [3], and Stack Overflow [7], we designed five tasks
that represent the challenge of creating web automation programs
with semantic conditions. The Appendix shows the details
of the user study tasks. To evaluate the usability and utility of the
system and compare the effectiveness of two intent specification
methods, we designed the tasks with the following goals in mind:
1) the web content to be scraped should be realistic and easily
understood by participants, 2) the tasks should extract information based on text and image content, 3) the condition criteria and
the corresponding results should contain some ambiguity to allow
room for refinement, and 4) the tasks should help SemanticOn to
demonstrate the system’s full capabilities. To achieve this goal, we
adopted and piloted five web scraping requests by real users on
online forums, two based on image-heavy websites (pet wallpapers3
, street photography4
), two with text-heavy content (movie
star biographies5
, list of novels6
), and one task with a variety of
both image and text content (beautiful places in the world7
). Participants needed to extract only images or only text content for
the first four tasks. In addition, they were randomly assigned to
use User Enters and System Suggests as their specification method
for the first four tasks. We counterbalanced the ordering of image
versus text tasks and the assigned specification method to eliminate
sequence and learning effects. To standardize task difficulty, participants needed to extract the top 15 text passages and/or images
from the website based on a semantic condition. For the final task,
participants needed to scrape both images and text in two separate
columns and were free to use both condition specification methods.
Task 5 served as an exploration task for participants to evaluate and
compare the two specification methods and was not constrained by
a result set or time. Participants engaged in this task until the end
of the study. Therefore, Task 5 was not included in the quantitative
analysis for accuracy and duration in the later sections.
We designed the conditions based on the content itself and established a ground truth result set that was compared with the
participant’s result to measure accuracy. The conditions were designed so that in the ground truth set, the number of results passing
and failing the condition across all tasks was approximately the
same (31 passes, 29 fails).
5.4 Results
5.4.1 Time and accuracy. The user study recorded 40 scenarios (10
participants x 4 tasks); one instance was discarded from analysis due
to a recording issue, resulting in 39 total task completions. Table 1
lists the average time (in minute:second) each participant spent and
the accuracy (percentage of correctly included and excluded results)
on each task. The overall average duration is 06:10 (image tasks
mean=05:55, text tasks mean=06:25), and the overall average task
accuracy is 80.7% (image tasks mean = 83.0%, text tasks mean =
78.5%). We could not identify statistical significance in the difference
in accuracy and duration across image and text tasks.
We also analyzed the data comparing usages of User Enters versus System Suggests. The average duration was 06:22 for User Enters
tasks and 05:57 for System Suggests tasks. In terms of mean accuracy, participants achieved 83.0% for User Enters tasks and 78.5%
for System Suggests tasks. Again, the differences are unable to be
identified as statistically significant.
5.4.2 Overall effectiveness in intent specification. In the exit survey,
participants rated the ease of use of SemanticOn overall, the ease
of use of each specification method, their mental effort, and their
trust in the system. Table 2 displays the average score for Likert
scale questions on SemanticOn’s usability. On a scale of 1 (strongly
disagree, very negative) to 7 (strongly agree, very positive), participants believed their specified conditions were displayed in an
easily understandable way (mean = 6.0, SD = 1.1) and that the
Task index Completion time
(mean, SD in mm:ss) Accuracy
1 05:06 (01:43) 85.3%
2 06:58 (02:28) 68.9%
3 06:44 (01:50) 81.3%
4 05:56 (01:50) 86.0%
Table 1: Average time spent on each task. Tasks 1 and 3 are
image tasks; tasks 2 and 4 are text tasks.
system-generated prompts in semi-automation mode helped them
refine their intent (mean = 5.6, SD = 0.97). However, participants
had polarized opinions on the statement “it was easy to coordinate
(claim controls, pause/resume, show/hide prompts) with SemanticOn
to repair under- or over-specifications,” with 5 participants agreeing
and 3 participants disagreeing (mean = 4.7, SD = 1.7). Overall,
the users widely accepted the semi-automation workflow towards
automation and the opportunity to adjust conditions later on by
pausing. 9 out of 10 participants added refinement conditions for
Tasks 1-4, and all participants utilized the system prompts in semiautomation mode to refine their conditions in Task 5.
5.4.3 Error-handling Analysis. As per DG3, SemanticOn offers
error-handling techniques for users during full automation. We
measured participants’ usage of three error repair methods: condition deletion, result deletion, and manual result addition. Most
users opted to use the pause and repair functionalities, as 7 participants deleted their specified conditions due to inaccuracies, 6
participants removed undesired output to repair system mistakes,
and 2 participants manually added desired contents missed by the
filter. The utilization of the error-handling features varied based on
the task type. For condition deletion, we found 16 instances across
image tasks and 0 instances for text tasks. Similarly, there were 11
instances of result deletion for image tasks and 2 for text tasks. As
for manual result addition, we found 3 instances for image tasks
and none for text tasks. This difference can be related to the content
processing speeds for visual versus textual materials. The condition
specification method also plays a role in the usage of error-handling
features. We observed 4 instances of condition deletions for User
Enters and 12 for System Suggests. In addition, we found 4 result
deletion instances for User Enters and 9 for System Suggests. This
can be attributed to the difference in the required effort for each
workflow. We expand on these varieties in our Discussion.
5.4.4 Comparison between User Enters and System Suggests. Regarding the difference between the two specification methods, participants found both experiences comparable but thought System
Suggest was easier to use. P10 said, “[My preference] really depends
on the task, but I really liked the System Suggests mode, especially
for words it was really easy to use and accurate.” When assessing
the overall experience to specify conditions, participants rated User
Enters slightly higher (mean = 5.3, SD = 1.1) than System Suggests
(mean = 5.1, SD = 1.2). But when evaluating the ease of use for each
interaction, users rated entering their own natural language descriptions lower (mean = 5.1, SD = 1.1) than brushing, highlighting, or
choosing system-suggested conditions (mean = 5.7, SD = 0.82). We
were unable to identify statistical significance in these differences.
However, when measuring the average number of initial conditions
set before the demonstration, participants specified an average of
2.6 conditions for User Enters and 4.1 conditions for System Suggests
(p < 0.05). This points to a difference in ease-of-use and conditiongeneration capability between the two methods, which is further
explored in Discussion.
Question Likert Scale (Mean, SD)
User Enters Experience 5.3 (1.0)
System Suggests Experience 5.1 (1.2)
User Enters Ease of Use 5.1 (1.0)
System Suggests Ease of Use 5.7 (0.8)
Coordination to Refine Specifications 4.7 (1.6)
Usefulness of Generated Prompts 5.6 (0.9)
Conditions Displayed Clearly 6.0 (1.0)
Trust in Full Automation 4.5 (1.5)
Success in Completing Task 5.0 (0.9)
Mental Demand 4.6 (1.7)
Effort to Achieve Results 4.9 (1.3)
Feelings of Insecurity and Stress 5.2 (1.7)
Feelings of Being Hurried or Rushed 4.9 (1.6)
Table 2: Survey Responses. For section one (top), 1 is very negative, and 7 is very positive. For section two (bottom), 1 is very high
mental demand, effort, insecurity and stress, and feelings of being
hurried and rushed.
5.4.5 Mental effort and AI system trust. Participants also reported
on their mental effort in completing the tasks and their trust in the
AI system in the survey. Participants generally reported medium
to high mental effort using SemanticOn, especially at the start
of the study when they had to familiarize themselves with the
interface and remember the workflow (P2, P5, P6, P7). On a scale of
1 (very demanding, very hard, not successful) to 7 (not demanding,
not hard at all, very successful), participants experienced medium
mental demand (mean = 4.6, SD = 1.8) and medium effort (mean =
4.9, SD = 1.4). They believed they were relatively successful in
accomplishing the tasks (mean = 5.0, SD = 0.94).
We also found that the participants exhibited a medium level of
trust (mean = 4.5, SD = 1.6) towards the AI system’s prediction
in full automation. Six users were comfortable entering full automation mode for at least one task. However, P3 and P7 expressed
very low trust in the automated prediction (both rated 2 out of 7 in
survey). During the interview, some participants (P5, P9) also commented that their trust in the system depended on the content type
and the number of refinements required for each task. For example,
P5 mentioned they “trust this picture task a bit more...[because] text
has more group[ing]s and potential variations” when they used 11
text refinements and only 1 image refinement. We analyze the effect
of content type on users’ perception of the task and our system in
the Discussion.
6 DISCUSSION
Based on the evaluation, we present analysis of the human-AI collaboration techniques and the role of each agent in SemanticOn. We
also discuss the implications of adding similarity-based machine
learning models in symbolic PBD systems. In addition, we report
findings on users’ trade-offs in using User Enters and System Suggests, as well as the intent specification effectiveness and system
limitations to provide insights on future designs.
6.1 Human-AI Collaboration
The user workflow of SemanticOn consists of both a human and an
artificial intelligence agent; they exchange control in different parts
of the interaction and collaborate to build a complete and accurate
web automation program. In SemanticOn, we utilize machine learning models’ classification efficiency to rapidly process texts and
images, summarize the content, and provide suggested semantic
filters to the user. This saves the user’s mental effort significantly,
as it is no longer the human’s role to parse content and identify an
inclusion or exclusion decision. However, it also introduces a new
source of error to web automation, as similarity-based models can
mislabel inputs and result in false positive and false negative data.
This is why human is always involved in the continuous human-AI
collaboration in SemanticOn. After a couple of demonstrations,
the user is prompted with potential semantic conditions for each
processed content in the semi-automation mode. Additionally, even
when the user feels satisfied with the set of conditions, the program
can still be paused at any time if a mistake is spotted or the user
wants to edit the conditions.
From the evaluation of this interaction paradigm, most participants (7/10) reported that the workflow’s path from demonstration
to guided semi-automation to full automation was intuitive and
useful. The semi-automation phase allowed users to calibrate conditions with SemanticOn and better understand the AI system’s
interpretation of the conditions. This is important as users might
not have had a well-defined semantic condition at the program’s
start. P4 believed that the “human brain still needs to think about
[how to describe the condition]...and link to all the keywords. These
words might not specifically come to mind to the human.” In this case,
the initial conditions may not include all of the user’s needs, resulting in low filter accuracy. The semi-automation mode provides aid
for this. For example, P3 mentioned that even if the results were
not accurate at the start, “I can interactively try to make [automated
prediction] better as it goes.” P4 also mentioned that “the transitional
period to trust the process is good, saves a lot of fuss.”
However, the steps to refine conditions and results through system prompts and automation pauses could require too much user
effort and become time-consuming. P5 commented that the entire
user experience was “a little slow...I think the fine-tuning part is
slow. Once you start [full automation], then it’s fine.” P2 reported
that “it took me multiple times to figure out the sequence of the buttons.” When they spotted system mistakes, P1 and P4 decided not
to pause and amend the errors because it took too much effort.
They believed the misclassified content was not detrimental to
the automation task, as there was no requirement for accuracy.
While supplying users with multiple refinement tools enhances
robustness, the system must be cautious not to overload users with
interaction techniques and interruptions.
6.2 Similarity-based Model in PBD Systems
A main contribution of SemanticOn is introducing a new interaction
paradigm for users to continuously add/refine semantic conditions
in programming-by-demonstration (PBD) systems. In particular, it
enables users to express intent via similarity-based machine learning models. This specification is at a higher abstraction level than
pure symbolic systems based on DOM structure. Here, we discuss the advantages and disadvantages of expressing intent using
similarity-based statistical models versus pure symbolic systems,
the implications of adding statistical models in PBD systems, and
the generalizability and viability of SemanticOn against errors.
Traditional symbolic automation systems like WebRobot are robust at understanding specific user actions and generalizing them
into repeatable steps in a synthesized program. This is achieved
by iterating over the elements in the DOM structure of the websites and generalizing the pattern. Meanwhile, statistical machine
learning models are useful at parsing high-level user intent and
matching unstructured, but semantically similar concepts, for example extracting key entities from a natural language input. However,
both systems alone have their limitations. Similarity-based models
lack reasoning capability. The machine learning models we employ
classify the inclusion and exclusion of content based on semantic
similarity, but they cannot derive further actions based on specific criteria. For example, the models alone could not construct a
program that repeatedly takes in an image URL, searches it, and
downloads the image based on semantic conditions. It is efficient in
the last filtering step but ineffective when structural elements need
to be generalized. In contrast, symbolic models that reason about a
set of user instructions over a certain website structure might fail
to generalize if the query is unstructured or outside the scope of
the task domain, while similarity models can cover a wider range of
input content that are not constrained by the structure. SemanticOn
combines these two techniques in an effective way that seals the
gap between users’ semantic intent and web automation.
From a practical standpoint, training an intelligent statistical
model for the tasks we cover in SemanticOn’s user evaluation would
be effortful. Systems like Calendar.help [22] require many expert
heuristics and even human workers to automate a very specific task
in event scheduling across different parties. In SemanticOn, users
compromise some effort by doing two rounds of demonstrations of
their desired web actions. Still, the automation tasks can be generalized to a diverse set of data on many different websites. Introducing
similarity-based models in symbolic systems does present a new
source of error as the models can filter content incorrectly, in addition to program synthesis errors in pure-symbolic systems. To
amend this, SemanticOn provides continuous condition refinement
and output edit/delete options so that users can repair classification
errors easily and yield more accurate results.
Our work does not rely on a specific program synthesizer to
generate a web automation program or a specific machine learning
model to filter content semantically. The novelty of SemanticOn is
the set of condition specification, refinement, and error-correction
interactions, which can be generalized to other PBD systems.
UIST ’22, October 29-November 2, 2022, Bend, OR, USA Kevin Pu, et al.
6.3 User Enters and System Suggests
One emphasis of this project is to compare the usability of the two
semantic condition specification methods. To summarize the findings, participants shifted their preference between System Suggests
and User Enters based on two factors: perceived effort and the type
of content presented. When participants expressed their preferences and the rationale behind using each specification method, we
also discovered a trade-off between their sense of control and the
perceived effort.
6.3.1 Perceived effort based on content types. Perceived effort plays
an important role in user preference. When it was easy to summarize the target content on which users needed to set conditions,
participants preferred to use User Enters to express their intent
instead of selecting System Suggests, which could be too broad or
too specific. P3 remarked that “[User Enters makes] you feel like [you
have] more control because you are looking for a specific thing.”
On the contrary, when the target content was information-heavy
and hard to encapsulate in a short natural language description,
participants preferred to use System Suggests to highlight the details
and let SemanticOn present potential conditions. P6 commented
that “I do like the possibility of being able to say this is what I see in
the image [based on System Suggests]... and [highlight] a part of the
image that I think is important.”
When participants were free to use both User Enters and System
Suggests (i.e. Task5 in Appendix Fig 8), we found that text content
inherently took more effort to process, and 7 out of 10 participants
opted to use System Suggests to avoid reading a large block of
text. In contrast, despite containing a variety of objects and entity
relationships, the corresponding image content could be encoded
and summarized more quickly, and 9 out of 10 participants chose
to specify their intents with User Enters.
This preference based on content type persisted during condition
refinement in semi-automation and full automation modes. Participants expressed difficulty in parsing textual information rapidly,
as they could not distinguish whether the system made the correct
selection. P3 said that “text task in general is much more difficult,”
and P5 commented, “when it comes to text task, I’m a little lazy to
read through all this... so system can just get me relevant keywords.”
Our observations support this as users were far more likely to repair errors for image tasks than text tasks by deleting inaccurate
conditions and incorrect results. Participants can quickly identify
whether an image fits the condition set, but they can not parse
through a block of text as the automation quickly processes each
row of content. Based on this finding, future designs should account
for the processing effort for text content and provide users more
time and aid in understanding and summarizing the information.
6.3.2 Sense of Control and mental effort trade-off. Another key
factor for specification preference was the sense of control. Three
participants (P3, P7, P10) listed a better sense of control as to why
they preferred User Enters, where they could tailor the condition
using their terms. In addition, in cases where System Suggests suggestions were inaccurate (e.g., failing to detect relevant text entities
or generate image captions at the appropriate granularity), some
participants (P2, P4, P6, P10) switched to User Enters.
However, there was a trade-off between the sense of control and
the required effort. Participants rated a lower ease-of-use score
on average for User Enters (5.1 versus 5.7 for System Suggests), despite it having fewer interaction steps. Three participants (P4, P5,
P10) pointed out that they preferred System Suggests due to the
convenience and ease of mental effort. System Suggests is also advantageous in reporting details that escaped the user’s attention.
For example, P4 pointed out that they preferred System Suggests
mode because it sometimes captured things that the user failed to
recognize or think of. Additionally, P7 mentioned that they “quite
like System Suggests more, [because it is] more systematic and highlights specific things.” Participants could avoid cognitive overload
by handing the processing labor to SemanticOn through System
Suggests, but they were limited to the generated set of conditions
for each item. This trade-off also affects participants’ usage of error
handling features during automation. With the increased cognitive
load in User Enters, participants are much less likely to pause and repair their mistakes than when using System Suggests. However, this
could be explained by participants adopting less accurate prompts
from System Suggests, which leads to more errors overall for users
to fix. Future work could potentially create a combined approach
where users can edit system-suggested conditions, yielding a sense
of control and avoiding heavy user efforts.
6.4 System Effectiveness
Most participants (8/10) agreed that SemanticOn is an effective tool
for web automation and that the condition specification aspect is
useful. Compared with manual effort and traditional data scraping
methods such as writing automation scripts, participants found SemanticOn’s no-code solution novel and easier to use. P5 mentioned
that in manual scraping scenarios, “Control-F would only get you
so far” and that the system is “much easier than writing your own
script...[and] more functionalit[ies]” In addition, P7 thought this tool
“would be super helpful for someone not comfortable with code. [It
provides] low effort but maximum reward.”
More than half of the participants (6/10) believed that SemanticOn could be applied to realistic tasks. However, some focused
on the conditional selection aspect, and others emphasized on the
complexity of the task. For example, P2 commented that the system
is “very good for selective tasks [when you] only want a few images
from a lot of them.” Similarly, P5 suggested that SemanticOn could
be used for websites without robust filtering, search engine, or categories because “it could easily make any website sort-able.” On the
other hand, P1 enjoyed using this tool on Task 5 with both image
and text conditions combined and proposed that “this type of tool
would benefit... power users [for tasks] like creating a dataset...[and]
dealing with complex things.” These reports provide evidence for
the need of no-code solutions in conditional web automation tasks.
6.5 System Limitations
There are several limitations to our system. First is the efficiency
of coordination. As mentioned, some participants found the refinement process complicated and slow and were reluctant to utilize
the functionality to increase system accuracy. In future designs,
the researchers could simplify the user interface and the interaction steps and condense the system prompt information to reduce
cognitive load.
Another limitation is the relatively low accuracy of the machine
learning models it relies on to classify text and image content. Partially, this relates to a design decision we made when building
SemanticOn. We first used two state-of-the-art models—OFA,
which uses a sequence-to-sequence learning framework, and ImageAI, which uses a convolutional neural network, for image
captioning and object detection, and we were able to achieve high
accuracy. However, the image processing was computation-heavy
and took more than 30 seconds per image on an off-the-shelf laptop.
To reduce the gulf of evaluation, we switched to the Microsoft
Azure computer vision model for near-instant cloud processing
but with lower accuracy and detail level for some content domains.
Similarly, for key phrase extraction, we employed the Microsoft
Azure language model, sending text contents via REST API calls
for near-instant processing. But the extracted key phrases often
have a low level of abstraction (i.e. extracting entities and nouns in
a sentence without indication of interaction) and could not provide
high-level descriptions like those used for image captions.
Additionally, SemanticOn builds upon an existing symbolic program synthesis system, WebRobot, which has its own constraints
and requirements. And the introduction of similarity-based machine learning models also presents ambiguity to the source of
error between incorrect program synthesis steps and result misclassifications. The user might be confused when encountering
unexpected behavior, as it could be a product of a user demonstration error or the system’s misunderstanding of user intents,
which requires a different workflow to repair. However, in our user
study, we emphasize repairing errors from machine learning model
mislabelling as that is the novel part of SemanticOn.
6.6 Future Work
We summarized three points of feedback that are relevant for future works. First, we found that participants spent a longer time
encoding and processing texts than images. This is coherent with
previous studies on human capability in consuming different types
of information. But, this finding is significant in full automation, when the system rapidly loops through web page content,
giving users little time to identify potential selection errors. Future
works could enable multi-modal interaction (e.g., voice) to reduce
the effort of information processing. Additionally, one can
provide more indicators for users to quickly recognize the information represented in text elements (e.g. highlighting matching key
phrases) and decide whether the content should be included based
on the semantic condition.
Second, participants separately favored one of the two condition specification methods, User Enters and System Suggests, depending on the content type and the amount of information they
needed to process. Similar to the neurosymbolic program synthesis
approach, future works could create a unified technique
where users could benefit from the instant and comprehensive results from machine learning models while preserving users’ power
to specify conditions on their own terms.
Lastly, future designs could further improve the system usability
by reducing the mental effort. The dual process of collaborating
with an AI on both demonstrating web macros to synthesize an
automation program and specifying semantic conditions to filter
web content requires a decent amount of mental effort, especially
for users who are less familiar with programming or web scraping.
Therefore, future designs should alleviate users’ cognitive load with
a more minimalist UI and more user guidance.
7 CONCLUSION
In this work, we designed and developed SemanticOn, a collaborative system that allows users to specify and refine visual and textual
conditions through user-entered descriptions and system-suggested
prompts in a web automation program. In a system evaluation, we
found that participants can effectively use SemanticOn to create
conditional filters and refine them via continuous human-AI collaboration, collecting selective web content with high accuracy. Participants’ feedback also suggested that a guided semi-automation
mode, where users authorize system predictions, helped clarify user
intents. We also found a trade-off between User Enters and System
Suggests regarding user effort and the sense of control. Our work
can point directions to future system and interaction designs for
user-intent specification and refinement in a continuous human-AI
collaboration setting.

=== Paper 2 ===
ABSTRACT
We propose a novel concept for haptics in which one centralized
on-body actuator renders haptic effects on multiple body parts by
stimulating the brain, i.e., the source of the nervous system—we call
this a haptic source-effector, as opposed to the traditional wearables’
approach of attaching one actuator per body part (end-effectors).
We implement our concept via transcranial-magnetic-stimulation
(TMS)—a non-invasive technique from neuroscience/medicine in
which electromagnetic pulses safely stimulate brain areas. Our
approach renders ∼15 touch/force-feedback sensations throughout
the body (e.g., hands, arms, legs, feet, and jaw—which we found
in our first user study), all by stimulating the user’s sensorimotor cortex with a single magnetic coil moved mechanically across
the scalp. In our second user study, we probed into participants’
experiences while using our haptic display in VR. Finally, as the

INTRODUCTION
Enabling users to leverage all their senses while immersed in interactive experiences has been one of the driving visions in HumanComputer Interaction—as Sutherland put it “[the interface] should
CHI ’24, May 11–16, 2024, Honolulu, HI, USA Yudai Tanaka et al.
serve as many senses as possible” [80]. To this date, an immense
body of work in haptics has engineered specialized actuators to
deliver skin sensations to the user’s body (e.g., contact , texture, pressure ).
The overwhelming majority of haptic devices are engineered
using the same principle, i.e., an actuator is mounted atop the
part of the skin that is meant to be stimulated, e.g., finger-worn
haptic devices deliver tactile cues to the fingerpad,
foot-worn devices deliver tactile cues to the soles, headworn devices deliver tactile cues to the face, and so forth—
this approach can also be referred to as haptic end-effector,
a term borrowed from robotics literature, where it denotes how
the actuator is attached at the very endpoint of a robotic extremity.
Similarly, in this context, a haptic end-effector denotes how the
actuator is attached at the very endpoint of the user’s nervous
system, e.g., a vibration motor attached atop the tactile receptors
at one’s fingertips. Users feel haptic sensations delivered by
end-effectors via the following process: (1) mechanical stimuli
are translated to electrical impulses (by mechanoreceptors at the
endpoint), (2) electricalsignals propagate via the peripheral nervous
system (via neurons from limbs to the spinal cord), and, finally, (3)
signals are processed in the source location where all the neurons
flow (i.e., the brain, in particular, the somatosensory cortex).
This end-effector approach has been successful in that devices
can deliver precise temporal and spatial cues. However, few examples of these devices lend themselves well to full-body haptic
experiences, which reveals a research question to which our field
has not found new answers: how might we scale up haptic devices
given that the current approach requires many devices to render
sensations on many locations of the user’s body?
Thus, to propose a new approach, we take the inverse conceptual
turn. Instead of placing haptic end-effectors on the endpoints of the
user’s nervous system, we propose delivering full-body haptics via
a single haptic device that directly stimulates the user’s brain areas
responsible for creating haptic sensations—we call this a sourceeffector.
To create the first instantiation of this concept, we turned to transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS)—a technique from medicine
that allows for safe & non-invasive brain stimulation. To translate the TMS technique into readily usable knowledge for humancomputerinteraction, we (1) characterized, by means of a userstudy,
which areas of the body TMS can elicit haptic sensations; then, (2)
engineered a haptic device that sits atop the user’s head and is able
to position the TMS coil at strategic locations to generate haptic
sensations (i.e., either touch or touch & force) in nine locations of
the users’ body: hands, arms, legs, feet, and jaw, as shown in Figure
1—all by stimulating the user’s sensorimotor cortex with a single
magnetic-coil moved mechanically across the scalp; furthermore,
(3) we characterized, by means of a second user study, the user
experience created by our device in a virtual reality application;
finally, (4) we mapped out the possible evolution of this concept,
including its hardware challenges.
Finally, we see this approach as the first step towards exploring new methods to scale haptic feedback to multiple body areas
without encumbering users’ bodies. Naturally, as a first step in this
direction, our current implementation using transcranial magnetic
stimulation is not without shortcomings. We will discuss these in
detail later as we believe they are crucial for identifying the next
research challenges to be tackled. However, we believe that our
work provides technical insights that will inspire researchers to
explore new approaches for haptics.

RELATED WORK
Our work is built primarily on approaches towards full-body haptic
feedback, which we organize by their conceptual takes on delivering
haptic sensations: to the endpoint (e.g., attaching a haptic endeffector to the palm, or even sending an air) or to a midpoint (e.g.,
electrically stimulating nerves in the arm to create touch on the
palm). We discuss the differences between these approaches and
our source-effector. Finally, since our approach is one of the very
few that makes use of transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS)
in an interactive context, we briefly review the working principle
behind this non-invasive brain stimulation technique.
2.1 Full-body Haptic Feedback by Stimulating
the Endpoint
N:N haptics (N actuators, N locations): The most popular way
to realize full-body haptics has been to attach an actuator per location where a sensation should be felt—hence N:N haptics. Some
of the first explorations of this approach date back to the 1990s,
when researchers used 10 vibrotactile actuators placed at the hands,
feet, legs, and head. Later, Lindeman et al. took this further
with 16 vibrators, even including solenoids and fans. Because
attaching/removing individual actuators on many parts of one’s
body is extremely time-consuming for the user and requires many
fixation points that encumber the user (e.g., straps), researchers
opt to integrate these vibrotactile actuators in haptic suits—both and are canonical examples of haptic suits, while many
more exist in research and even in industry (e.g., bHaptics). This haptic-suit approach improves wearability & comfort
by trading it off with design flexibility (e.g., it is harder to reconfigure the location of the devices depending on body size, individual
preferences, goals of the application, and so forth).
1:N haptics (1 actuator, N locations): Counter to the previous approach, an emergent and more experimental way to deliver
haptics to the endpoint, is to use a single actuator. In these systems, there is only one actuator but the user feels sensations in
multiple locations—hence 1:N haptics. One way to enable this is
to utilize the air around the user: as demonstrated by AIREAL, an
air vortex that stimulates the skin up to 1 m away. This approach has been then extended to present tactile sensations at the
head, shoulders, and legs. Another approach is to attach
a single haptic actuator to an endpoint but then move it mechanically to reach different limbs. For instance, Calico is an on-cloth
robotic platform that moves a small end-effector across the user’s
clothes, providing vibrations from arms to legs. As emergent
techniques, these are not without limitations. In the case of air
vortexes, these require line of sight, intensity decays over distance,
and have a limited interactive volume, etc. Conversely, moving
wearables on the body is relatively slow and can require rails added
to one’s clothing, etc. Most importantly, all of these techniques
cannot deliver force feedback—these provide only tactile cues (e.g.,
soft puffs of air or vibrations). That said, these devices conceptually
align with our goal, i.e., building a centralized haptic device capable
of delivering haptics to multiple locations. In addition, these are
flexible in adding new points of sensation easily (i.e., pointing the
air cannon or moving the on-body robot). Thus, we are inspired by
these centralized devices, yet seek to explore a novel approach that
breaks away from having to stimulate the endpoint.
2.2 Haptic Feedback by Stimulating the
Midpoint (Peripheral Nerves)
An approach, which we draw inspiration from, is to create sensations in a target area, but using actuators attached to another patch
of skin that communicate via peripheral nerves. These techniques
typically work by electrically stimulating nerves to induce sensations ”remotely” at the endpoint of this nerve. This can take the
form of touch-feedback (electro-tactile) or force-feedback stimulation (electrical muscle stimulation).
Tactile sensations from the midpoint. One way to create
tactile sensations without attaching a haptic end-effector to the
endpoint is to stimulate the nerve that leads to it—this is known
as inducing a referred sensation, i.e., “somatosensory feelings that
are perceived to emanate from a body part other than, but in association with, the body part being stimulated”. While this
was initially only explored in prosthetics to provide tactile feedback to the prosthetic hands or feet of amputees, it
has also been adapted to enable users to feel tactile sensations in
their hands or fingerpads without attaching electrodes directly to
these areas; instead, electrodes are placed on the wrist to create
sensations in the hand, or other strategic locations more
proximal to the peripheral nerves such as the back-side of the hand, palm, or base of the fingers to induce sensations
in the fingerpads.
Force feedback from the midpoint. Similar to this, with
electrical muscle stimulation (EMS), it is possible to create force
feedback without requiring mechanical actuators (e.g., motors or
exoskeletons). Electrical impulses are sent to electrodes placed atop
a muscle (midpoint), which in turn cause a movement on the limb
(endpoint). For example, stimulating the forearm can cause the
fingers or the wrist to move. Similarly, stimulating
the neck can move the head , or even stimulating the calf 
or thigh can move the foot.
Pushing past the midpoint. While we take inspiration from
these techniques, we ask the natural question: how would an interactive system look like if we moved past the midpoint? The logical
consequence of this is to actuate the source of the nervous system,
i.e., the user’s brain, to generate sensations even at larger distances
and from a centralized haptic device. To find a suitable method to
stimulate the brain, we turn to the field of neuroscience where a
number of brain stimulation techniques are used in research & therapeutics. There are several established techniques to achieve this,
however, they range in their applicability outside of the medical
domain. First, invasive techniques involve implanting electrodes in
the brain, via a surgical procedure. Given thisstringentrequirement
of implantation, this technique (known as intracortical microstimulation) is typically used for extreme medical cases, such as
researching prosthetics with tactile feedback for amputees.
On the other side of the spectrum stand non-invasive techniques,
which trade off accuracy for safety and wide applicability. One
such non-invasive technique that has been extensively explored for
the last decades is transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS).
Before we turn into the details of this technique, we note that TMS
is not the only non-invasive brain stimulation approach; others
include transcranial direct-current stimulation or transcranial
focused ultrasound stimulation (tFUS). With regards to tDCS,
it is a neuromodulation technique that uses small electrical currents
delivered via electrodes on the scalp; as a modulation technique, it
typically does not have the accuracy nor amplitude to induce haptic
sensations and is used for neuropsychiatric conditions. On
the other hand, tFUS is a nascent stimulation technique that uses
focused ultrasound, delivered by a transducer placed atop the scalp. While tFUS might eventually resolve some limitations of TMS
(which we will discuss later in detail, e.g., device weight), its safety
protocols and guidelines are still under development, unlike those
of TMS, which have been established for decades. Therefore,
we decided to implement our concept using TMS.
2.3 Transcranial Magnetic Stimulation
Transcranial Magnetic Stimulation (TMS). TMS is a technique
that originated in medicine/neuroscience, in which a magnetic
coil placed atop the user’s head produces a magnetic field that oscillates rapidly. This, in turn, creates electrical currents, known
as eddy currents, inside the brain, without the need for implanted cables or electrodes [24] (as with other brain stimulation
techniques)—it is thus, non-invasive.
TMS in neuroscience as a toolto understand brain function.
TMS has been popularized as a tool for neuroscience since first
demonstrated by Barker et al. in 1985. It is frequently used
to map brain functions to cortical areas, e.g., motor control,
vision, language processing, working memory, and
more.
TMS as a medical intervention/treatment. TMS has also
been extensively used as therapy for improving motor function in
Parkinson’s patients, reducing epileptic seizures, and as a
depression treatment.
Peripheral magnetic stimulation (e.g., muscles or touch).
While magnetic stimulation finds its primary use in stimulating the
brain, it can also be used for peripheral nerves, placing its coil atop
muscles (similar to EMS) or skin (similar to electro-tactile). While
the latter (tactile) is rather rare, it has been used for creating tactile
sensations in mid-air without the need for direct contact.
The former (magnetic muscle stimulation), has been used for muscle
rehabilitation, gaiting, and even swallowing. Moreover,
recently, it has also been used for interactive force-feedback.
It is worth noting that, unlike TMS, these magnetic skin/muscle
actuation systems create sensations by stimulating the periphery—
these are still midpoint approaches.
TMS in interactive systems. Although it is known that TMS
applied to the motor cortex induces limb movement and/or
touch sensations in the hand, its presence in human-computer
interaction remainslimited. Recently, Bassolino et al. demonstrated
that TMS to the motor cortex improves the sense of embodiment
in a VR rubber hand illusion. While this implies the utility of
haptic feedback via TMS, to our knowledge, there have been no
3 IMPLEMENTING SOURCE-EFFECTOR VIA
TMS
To help readers replicate our design, we now provide the necessary
technical details (hardware & software), alongside a discussion of
important safety considerations for any future interactive system
based on TMS. Furthermore, to accelerate replication, we provide
all the source code & hardware of our implementation1
Design rationale. As the first instantiation of the concept of a
head-worn centralized haptic device, we focused on understanding
the range of sensations & locations that can be created using TMS
rather than optimizing for form-factor or ergonomics. As such, we
opted to implement a versatile design that could move a powerful
medical-grade TMS coil. This gave us maximum flexibility in our
findings, as the coil has excellent stimulation depth; in other words,
using smaller coils would result in a smaller device, but would not
allow us to learn the full range of haptics that TMS can unleash.
Now that we know the range of haptics that can be generated via
TMS (Study#1) and the afforded user experiences (Study#2), we
are poised to also explore new design trade-offs. These include the
potential use of multiple smaller coils rather than moving a single
powerful coil, which we will discuss later.
3.1 Hardware Implementation
We engineered the actuation system shown in Figure 2, capable of
moving a TMS coil (Magstim D702 butterfly coil) around the user’s
head, which is connected to a medical-grade magnetic stimulator
(Magstim Super Rapid2).
Robotic platform. The key component in our hardware implementation is a robotic gantry that mechanically moves the TMS
coil across key areas of the user’s scalp. Our design is inspired by
a traditional X-Y-Z gantry system commonly found in CNC machines, but with key modifications that allow it to: (1) most
importantly, conform to the curvature of the scalp around the pitch
axis (i.e., front/back), which is estimated to be ∼18 degrees for
the sensorimotor cortex area, based on our measurement from a
standard head shape dataset; (2) accommodate different heads,
including different curvatures and sizes; (3) actuate with sufficient
force to move a medical-grade TMS coil (∼1 kg); (4) actuate with
steps smaller than 8.5 mm, as determined by our Study#1; and, finally, (5) provide a structure that can be either directly mounted to a
VR headset or suspended from the ceiling (as in). To satisfy
these requirements we engineered the actuation system shown in
Figure 2.
Actuators. We feature three actuators, respectively, to move the
coil in the X- (ear-to-ear translation), Y- (nose-to-back translation),
and Z- (height away from the scalp) axes. Since the X-axis exhibits
most curvature as the coil moves towards the ear, we actuate it
via a servo motor (Feetech FT5335M; maximum torque=392N·cm)
with a built-in encoder, this offers a reliable, fairly compact, strong
way to actuate the coil—as the coil moves closer to the ear it exerts
more torque force to the servo lever. As we found in our technical evaluation, we can move the servo reliably & repeatably at
4.2 mm steps. For the Z-axis (height away from the scalp) we employ a linear actuator (Actuonix L16-P; gear ratio=63:1; maximum
load=100N) with a built-in encoder, mounted directly to the lever of
the aforementioned servo. Finally, for the Y-axis (as the coil moves
from nose to back) we also use a linear motor (Actuonix P8-P; gear
ratio=165:1; maximum load=110N) with a built-in encoder. The
Y-axis is mounted to the endpoint of the Z-axis actuator and, ultimately, holds the coil via a custom metallic adaptor. As we found
in our technical evaluation, we can move the Y- and Z- actuators
reliably & repeatably at 1.9 mm and 2.6 mm steps respectively. So
far, what we described is a typical gantry (with carefully chosen
actuators that are strong enough to move the TMS coil), however,
with the standard design with fixed perpendicular axes, we would
not be able to account for the head’s curvature. This would require
at least adding more actuators to tilt the coil. Instead, to avoid more
actuators, we opted to build a structure with passive mechanisms.
In the following, we describe the structural elements that make this
possible.
Structural elements. To account for curvature, the Z-axis
needs to be lifted as the coil traverses the head. One option, that
we explored in the early phase of the engineering, was to let the
coil hang entirely at the end of the Y-axis, with no further structure
to support it. This is similar to some CNC machines that optimize
for space and do not feature two rails per degree of freedom (e.g.,
EasyThreed X1). However, we noted this increased the slack and
backlash due to the coil’s weight. As such, we added a mount on
the faceplate of the VR headset (Meta Quest 2), which is depicted
in Figure 2. The faceplate was drilled and secured to our custom
mount using M4 screws and a ball bearing. To enable movement
with the new mount point, we incorporated a passive mechanism
comprised of linear rails and bearings (Figure 2). This design allows
the Z-axis linear actuation to tilt the coil around the pitch axis,
adapting to the nose-to-back curvature of the scalp. Lastly, the
secondary mount attaches to the back of the VR headset’s strap
using a custom 3D-printed bracket.
Alternative designs. Many other designs are certainly possible
and ours depicts one possibility. For instance, one could add a
hemispheric rail connecting the sides of the VR headset’s strap to a
passive rail, thus guiding the coil with greater precision. However,
after experimenting with this, we noted that this also has drawbacks:
(1) it prevents the headset’s strap-size adjustment from working,
rendering oursystem fixed in size unlike our current design (i.e., the
rails properly slide asthe user adjuststhe headset for theirsize); and
(2) It restricts the coil’s movement to a single line over the cortex,
eliminating the possibility of diagonal movement. Additionally, it
is important to note that our evaluation showed our system has
already achieved sufficient accuracy to stimulate the sensations
found in Study#1.
3.2 Software Implementation
To control our medical-grade TMS stimulator, we implemented a
custom middleware via MagPy Python Toolbox, which routed
serial communication to the stimulator and received Open Sound
Control (OSC) commands. Our main applications for both studies
ran on Unity3D, which dispatched OSC commands to our custom
middleware for TMS, and serial commands to a SAMD21-XIAO
microcontroller connected to the motors and encoders. For tracking
the hands and feet, we used HTC VIVE 3.0 Trackers attached to the
user’s extremities, and integrated their tracking information into
Quest 2’s headset tracking using Open VR Space Calibrator.
Stimulation flow. When a VR experience requests feedback,
the following process triggers the stimulation: the Unity3D application communicates the required stimulation intensity to the Python
middleware via OSC, which is then conveyed to the stimulator as a
serial command using MagPy. As a result, the stimulator charges its
capacitor arrays at the requested intensity. In parallel, the Unity3D
application also sends serial commands to the motor controller to
move the coil to a target area. Once the coil hasreached the position
and five seconds have elapsed since the previous stimulation (see
3.3 Safety), the Unity3D application sends another OSC command
to our middleware to trigger the TMS stimulation using three consecutive 300-`s biphasic cosine cycle pulses, each separated
by a 50-millisecond interval. Finally, the resulting current flow
through the coil creates the oscillating magnetic field, delivering
the stimulation to the target brain region.
3.3 Safety
Risks of TMS. Like any other electrical or brain stimulation technique, TMS is not without its associated risks. These are primarily
local skin-tingling at the scalp or magnetic interference with implanted devices, which can be avoided through user screening and
the proper selection of stimulation parameters. Moreover, according to a set of safety & ethics guidelines for TMS released in
2021, as long as TMS is applied to subjects without epilepsy,
no lasting adverse events (e.g., seizures) have been reported. This
claim is further supported by a comprehensive review of TMS, including long-term use of up to 26 months. TMS is also an
FDA (Food and Drug Administration) approved technique for therapeutic purposes. The minimal risk of TMS is ensured by
properly screening the population and limiting stimulation within
the known safety range.
User screening. In adherence to the safety guidelines,
we strictly applied the following user eligibility criteria. First, we
did not recruit participants with medical conditions that could increase the risks associated with TMS (i.e., epilepsy, or history of
seizures). Second, in line with the safety guidelines for fMRI,
we did not recruit participants with implanted devices (e.g., pacemakers, metal implants) to prevent unintended interactions with
the electromagnetic field generated by the coil. We also ensured
ethical compliance by obtaining informed consent from participants prior to using our device—overall, these screening criteria
are mostly analogous to those for EMS.
Stimulation parameters. Rossi et al.’s guidelines provide a
range of stimulation parameters that ensure minimal risks during
TMS. These specify the maximum stimulation duration and
the necessary break period between stimulations as a function of
the stimulation frequency. For instance, for a 20 Hz stimulation,
the guidelines prescribe a safe continuous stimulation up to 400
ms (i.e., 8 consecutive pulses). Following this guideline, we use
the stimulation parameter of three consecutive pulses with 50 ms
intervals—a conservative & safe approach using less than half of
the maximum pulse count that is deemed safe. Moreover, for these
stimulation parameters, Rossi et al. further recommend adding a
five-second break between stimulation sequences. As such, our
software apparatus does not allow the TMS stimulation to be reactivated unless five seconds have elapsed prior to the preceding
stimulation. This additional safety was also incorporated into our
VR experience used in Study#2, by adjusting aspects such as the
timing of the enemy’s attacks or charge-up duration for the user’s
projectile launcher.
4 TECHNICAL EVALUATION
We conducted two technical characterizations: (1) device characterization (i.e., end-to-end latency, noise, weight), and (2) actuation characterization (i.e., accuracy in moving the coil on the
user’s scalp).
4.1 Device Characterization
End-to-end latency. We measured an end-to-end latency of 16 ms
using a 240fps camera that also recorded sound—this is a complete
round-trip, from an event in Unity3D to the audible sound of a TMS
pulse. For simplification, the coil was already at the target, we will
later characterize the actuation speed delay while moving the coil.
Operating noise. We measured the sound generated by our
TMS using a decibel meter (AS824) placed at the height of a user’s
ear (ten repetitions). We measured an average peak of 79.8 dB at the
average TMS intensity used in Study#2 (actuating the leg, which
requires the most amplitude). In comparison, haptic devices such as
propeller-based tend to be louder (e.g., produces up to 95.3dB).
Also, propeller-based devices actuate for several seconds or even
stay on for minutes, instead, our TMS produces sounds for only
150 ms.
Device weight. The total weight of the device is 3.1 kg (measured with a Camry Digital Scale, 50g resolution), which consists
of 1.1 kg from the effective weight of the TMS coil when worn
and connected to the stimulator and 2.0 kg from our mechanical
actuators, rails, and attachments.
4.2 Coil Actuation Characterization
As we willsee in our Study#1, we observed that the shortest distance
between adjacent locations on participants’ scalps that correspond
to haptics on different limbs, was approximately 17 mm. Consequently, we required an actuator that meets this level of precision,
ideally with a resolution of at least half that distance, i.e., 8.5 mm.
Measurement setup. All the evaluation in this section was
conducted with a HTC VIVE 3.0 tracker (with a tracking accuracy
of 0.3 mm [7]) attached to the coil of our complete system worn by
a mannequin head. We used our Unity3D application
to control the motors while recording the tracker’s position. Note
that the positional difference between the tracker and the center
of the coil was compensated via an offset applied in the Unity3D
spatial coordinates.
Range of motion. We characterized the range of motion for
each motor axis. We found that the rotation of the servo motor
(X-axis) spans 24 cm across the head. The actuation range of the
Y-axis linear actuator equates to 7.4 cm across the head, and the
Z-axis linear actuator’s range corresponds to a 24-degree tilt of the
coil in the pitch axis.
Minimum step-size. We characterized the step-sizes that the
coil can robustly move on the scalp using its servos and linear
actuators, which we found to be: 4.2 mm, 1.9 mm, and 2.6 mm for
the X-, Y-, and Z-axes respectively.
Actuation consistency. The most important factor is the ability
to consistently replicate target coil positions multiple times after
calibration, i.e., measuring the motors’ drift. For this test, we instructed the system to actuate to eight known targets in the four
cardinal directions at two distances that were pre-defined. In these
measurements, the coil was first set to the initial position where the
center of the coil coincided with the center of the mannequin’sscalp.
Then, the coil was actuated at the speed employed in our Study#2
(50mm/s on X-axis, 8mm/s on Y-axis, and 18mm/s on Z-axis), After
stopping, we calculated the error. We repeated this 10 times for
each target to obtain a variability, as a metric of robustness. Figure
3 (b) shows our results. We found that the average error across the
targets was 1.4 mm (SD=0.7) on the X-axis (left/right) and 1.5 mm
(SD=0.4) on the Y-axis (front/back). Consequently, this actuation
consistency, along with the minimum step sizes, confirmed that
our system surpasses the required precision of 8.5 mm.
Actuation latency. We measured the time that our actuation
system would require in a worst-case scenario, where the coil needs
to travel from the jaw location on the left side to its counterpart on
the right. Drawing from the average unit distance between different
stimulation targets on the scalp as determined in our Study#1, we
set the distance for this case to be 13.6 cm. We found it takes 3.2
seconds for our system to cover this furthest distance.
5 CONTRIBUTION, BENEFITS & LIMITATIONS
Our key contribution is a novel interface concept, haptic sourceeffector, which we explore as an alternative direction to scaling
haptic interfaces to be able to render full-body sensations from a
centralized on-body device.
Our approach has four key benefits: (1) One actuator for fullbody haptics: unlike haptic systems created by a constellation of
many devices, our implementation has only one centralized point
of contact with the user’s brain; this is beneficial in that it demonstrates a path forward to scaling haptics without the complexities
associated with wearing many actuators. (2) Easily reconfigurable: as our TMS coil moves over the user’s scalp, it gains access
to eliciting tactile/force sensations across many parts of the user’s
Haptic Source-effector: Full-body Haptics via Non-invasive Brain Stimulation CHI ’24, May 11–16, 2024, Honolulu, HI, USA
body, thus the device can reconfigure by moving to a new stimulation location of the user’s brain—contrast the distance that an
actuator would have to be moved if swapped from hands to feet
(source-effector’s movement on the scalp is 50-times smaller than
that). (3) Freeing up the body: because source-effector only sits
on the head, it frees up the rest of the body from hardware—no
need to wear end-effectors which would otherwise limit the user’s
ability to feel sensations in their hands or feet; (4) Force & touch:
since any sensory information takes the form of electrical currents
passing through neurons in the brain, our approach renders both
touch & forces—two different modalities that conventionally require two different types of actuators (e.g., vibrotactile motors and
force-based exoskeletons).
Limitations. We acknowledge that our current implementation
of source-effector based on TMS has its limitations and every benefit has associated caveats. First, while our concept is novel in that a
single point of instrumentation can realize haptics in many body
locations, this instrumentation is currently heavy. Second, this
point of instrumentation leaves plenty to be optimized for in terms
of comfort (not only total weight but distribution of weight too).
Third, while this haptic actuator is unique in its ability to reconfigure to stimulate new body locations, the fundamental limits of TMS
dictate the expressivity of this approach—like any other technique
based on stimulating neurons, TMS is also non-selective, i.e., electrical eddy currents traverse through many neurons at once, which
limits induced sensations (i.e., touch & forces, but not thermal),
limits spatial fidelity (i.e., we cannot stimulate small brain areas
and those corresponding to high thresholds such as the torso), and
modality isolation (e.g., force-feedback occurs with touch). Moreover, we discuss more detailed limitations in our roadmap as we
believe that these point to a set of challenges worth pursuing to
further unlock TMS’ interactive potential.
Finally, we reflect on the nature of our proposal: the TMS technique we employed is not new—it originates from neuroscience and
medicine as a method to understand our brain function. However,
the value of our proposal also lies in the translation of this medical
tool as a new way for full-body haptics. In fact, similar translational
efforts have previously advanced our field, e.g., the PossessedHand
[69] translated a 50-year-old medical tool (i.e., EMS) into our field,
leading to a growth in force-feedback research. Likewise, our effort
is the first to translate transcranial magnetic stimulation from the
realm of neuroscience into new knowledge for designing brainhaptic systems.
6 STUDY#1: GENERATING HAPTIC
SENSATIONS ACROSS THE BODY WITH
BRAIN STIMULATION
In our first study, we focused on characterizing the range of our
source-effector concept when implemented by means of medicalgrade transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS), by measuring: (1)
in what locations can haptic sensations be created using TMS? and,
(2) what types of haptic sensations can TMS create?
As such, a TMS-trained experimenter stimulated the nine predefined locations on the right hemisphere of participants’ sensorimotor cortex using TMS, while participants reported where they
felt sensations and the strongest point of tactile sensation, as well
as observing any resulting limb movements—this study design was
based on traditional neuroscientific methods used by prior work to
investigate motor responses to TMS , as well as perceived
locations or qualities of electro-tactile stimulation.
The study was approved by our Institutional Review Board (IRB21-
0055).
6.1 Study Design
Participants. We recruited 12 participants from our institution
(7 identified as male, 5 as female, average age = 23.2 years, SD =
2.2). All participants were right-handed. The participants were
compensated with $30 USD.
Apparatus. We used a medically compliant magnetic stimulator
(Magstim Super Rapid2) with a butterfly coil (Magstim D702). The
participant sat in a reclined chair, wearing earplugs and a white
fabric cap on their scalp, which allowed the experimenter to mark
the stimulation locations prior to actual trials. For reporting elicited
touch sensations, we provided participants with an iPad and Apple
pencil running our GUI application. This enabled them to draw the
perceived sensation area on front/back views of a human model.
They reported the quality of the sensation by selecting from the
following six keywords: “tapping”, “vibrating”, “tingling”, “pressing”, “skin-stretching”, and “thermal”. For evaluating force feedback
from TMS, we video-recorded participants throughout the study
and post-annotated any involuntary joint movements via TMS that
occurred during each trial.
Stimulation. We stimulated the right hemisphere of the sensorimotor cortex (corresponding to the left side of the body) with
three consecutive 320 `s TMS pulses separated by 50 ms, resulting
in a stimulation of ∼150 ms. While we opted to only stimulate the
right side of the brain to avoid fatigue, the results will be generalizable to the left side. In fact, we purposefully picked this side
because it allowed us to measure the worst-case scenario since the
other side (dominant side) of the brain is known more sensitive to
TMS.
Defining the stimulation locations. We identified two locations on the participant’s scalp that yielded minimum stimulation
intensitiesto elicit observable limb movement (i.e., motor threshold)
for the hand and foot. For this, the experimenter moved the coil
following the grid-search method used by Franza et al., while
adjusting the intensity based on Awiszus’ method. After setting
the hand and foot locations, we defined the final nine locations on
a line between them. These were equidistant at one-sixth of the
distance between the hand and foot locations.
Procedure. We started trials at the foot location. For each location, the intensity was set to 10% below the hand’s motor threshold.
The amplitude of TMS stimulation wasreported in percentage (100%
is the stimulator’s maximum). During a trial, the experimenter stimulated the target location. Afterward, the participant reported the
strongest point and area of a perceived touch as well as a keyword
(or if nothing was felt). Then, the experimenter increased the intensity by 5% while ensuring the participant’s comfort & consent, and
moved to the next trial. This process continued until the participant
reported the same location and same quality of sensations for two
consecutive trials, or the intensity reached the maximum (i.e., 100%).
At that point, the procedure advanced to the next location.
6.2 Results
Overview. Figure 4 depicts an overview summarizing the body
locations where we were able to induce touch and/or movement
in participants. Overall, these results suggest that we were able
to induce touch sensations without body movement in two
locations (hand & foot), and involuntary body movement accompanied with or without touch in six locations (fingers,
hand, forearm, lower leg, foot, and jaw). Moreover, it is worth
noting that we only actuated the right hemisphere of their cortex
corresponding to the non-dominant hand side of the body for the
sake of participants’ time (study durations of up to 1.5 hours). On
Figure 5: (a, b) Extracted raw data of where the participants
felt touch sensations in the hand and foot. (c) Quality of the
sensations.
this note, neuroscience research suggests that it is more challenging to induce somatosensory responses in the side we actuated
(non-dominant) via TMS [92]—thus, these results are expected to
generalize even better to the other side. When accounting for both
sides of the user’s body, this brings the haptic sensations that can be
induced by TMS to a total of 15 sensations with a single actuator:
four touch sensations and eleven force-feedback sensations. Note
that we regarded jaw movement as one sensation. In the following,
we analyze each modality (i.e., touch / force-feedback) in more
detail.
Touch. Results suggest that we were able to induce, by means of
TMS, touch sensations(i.e., only tactile in isolation of any noticeable
movements) in two unique locations: hand and foot, which were
both experienced by 75% of the participants (i.e., nine participants).
The next most promising area was found to be touch on any of the
four fingers, experienced by 67% of participants, which we did not
find to meet our criteria. Now, we turn to where in the hand or foot
these touch sensations occurred. For this purpose, for each of the
nine participants who reported sensations in these areas, we plotted
raw data from one trial where they felt the strongest touch sensation
in these areas. As shown in Figure 5 (a, b), TMS could induce the
sensations on the front side of the hand or the either side of the foot,
meaning no simultaneous sensations were observed in other areas.
Moreover, we found that these tactile sensations had spectrum of
quality with the majority being described as “tapping” (33%) or
“vibrating” (33%), and less often as “tingling” (11%), “pressing” (11%,
22%) or stretching (11%, 0%)—as depicted in Figure 5 (c).
Force-feedback. As shown in Figure 4, our results suggest that
we were able to induce, by means of TMS, force-feedback sensations
(i.e., noticeable involuntary movements) in six unique locations:
jaw (75%), forearm (100%), hand (92%), fingers (83%), lower-leg
(92%), and foot (92%), which were all experienced by >75% of the
participants. In fact, most of the actuated limbs were observed in
almost all participants (>90%) except for the jaw (75%) and fingers
(83%). The next most promising candidate would be the upper leg
(58%), which we did not find to meet our criteria. Furthermore,
all these force-feedback sensations were associated with touch
at the same location (e.g., if the hand was actuated involuntarily,
there was touch felt & reported on the hand), except for the jaw
movements. Jaw movements were observed to be isolated from
touch sensations (i.e., only movement was observed). Moreover,
while the jaw movement was likely also unilateral (i.e., it moved
the left side of the jaw more than the right) its effect was perceived
by participants as one single movement, i.e., jaw clenching on both
sides; hence, we only consider this as a single haptic sensation.
Correspondence to the brain areas. Next, we analyze which
locations of the sensorimotor cortex were more effective in creating
haptic sensations. Figure 6 depictsthe brain region that we targeted,
with a line emphasizing the principal axis of the sensorimotor
cortex, which was defined for each participant prior to trials. From
Haptic Source-effector: Full-body Haptics via Non-invasive Brain Stimulation CHI ’24, May 11–16, 2024, Honolulu, HI, USA
Figure 6: A heatmap of stimulation locations ofthe sensorimotor cortex corresponding to evoked touch sensations & movements.
here, we depict the effectiveness of each stimulation location in
creating touch or movement at nine equally separated positions
on the main axis. In defining these positions, we found that the
average unit distance between each location was 8.3 mm (SD=0.9;
min=7; max=10). This suggest that only position 2 was redundant
with 1, and the remainder were useful for haptics. Moreover, the
two nearest adjacent locations that successfully stimulated limbs
were separated by ∼17 mm (x2 average unit distance). Thisindicates
that interactive systems operating a TMS coil should maintain a
positional precision of at least ∼8.5 mm, which we used as our
design specification.
Stimulation thresholds. Finally, with respect to inducing haptic sensations by means of TMS, we investigated at what intensity
haptic effects occurred. Figure 7 shows a breakdown of the intensity
at which touch sensations and/or movement were first observed
on average. Overall, haptic effects occurred within the range of
60∼85%. Results also suggest that body parts closer to the torso consistently required higher stimulation intensities (e.g., the forearm
required more than the hand), indicating that the extremities are
easier to stimulate. Additionally, touch sensations always occurred
at lower intensities than movements, which aligns with Franza et
al’s findings on TMS studies of the hand [25].
Figure 7: A summary ofthe minimum stimulation intensities
observed to induce touch sensations & movements.
Study conclusions. Overall, our results imply that, when considering both sides of a user’s body, TMS can produce a total of
15 haptic sensations using just one actuator: touch sensations at
each of the four extremities and force feedback at eleven locations
spanning across the jaw and the four limbs. Finally, building on
our findings, we designed an interactive experience that can render
force feedback to the user’s hand, forearm, foot, and lower leg on
both sides of the body and used it to probe into experiential aspects
of our approach.
7 STUDY#2: USER’S EXPERIENCE WITH
SOURCE-EFFECTOR
This study was designed so that participants could provide qualitative feedback regarding their experience with this on-of-a-kind
device during an actual interactive use. To this end, participants
experienced a custom-design VR game that featured several sensations that our device is capable of (from Study#1). VR experience
wasfollowed by a semi-structured interview to let participants voice
their experiences. This study was approved by our Institutional
Review Board (IRB21-0055).
7.1 Apparatus, VR & Haptic Design
Apparatus. Participants wore our complete device and a VR headset (Meta Quest 2), as described in Implementation. Their hands and
feet were tracked via four HTC VIVE 3.0 Trackers attached with
Velcro-straps. Participants wore headphones (Apple Airpods Pro)
to hear the VR experience.
VR experience. Participants embodied the avatar of a cyborg
trying to escape a robotics factory that has malfunctioned, as depicted in Figure 8 (a). However, when they find the escape route
blocked by malfunctioning robots that fire at them, —as depicted
in Figure 8 (b)— the VR experience commands our haptic device
to render tactile sensation on the affected area (e.g., the left hand in
this case, but both hands and feet are possible). To advance, participants can counteract by charging up their plasma-hand and firing
plasma-projectiles to deactivate the robots—as depicted in Figure 8
(c)—when they open the palm of their hands in a firing gesture, the
VR experience detects this gesture and prompts our haptic device
to render force-feedback and tactile sensations on the firing hand
(e.g., the right hand in the case, but both hands can fire plasma
shots). After this, the user continues to counteract any robots that
appear, which can fire shots against any of the user’s VR limbs (i.e.,
the hands or feet). Figure 8 (d) shows the user being shot in their
right foot—just before this happens, the VR prompts our haptic
device to render tactile sensation on the right foot. After a while,
the user’s plasma-hand stops working, and they need to recharge
the energy. They locate a crate on the floor and stomp it with their
feet to release its charging energy—as depicted in Figure 8 (e)—just
before the stomping releases the energy, the VR commands our
haptic device to render force-feedback and tactile sensation on the
Figure 8: Full-body interactions in our Study#2, including: force-feedback and tactile sensations on both hands and both feet.
left leg. The user keeps fighting until they eventually find a button
that opens the exit door—as depicted in Figure 8 (f)—as they are
about to press it, the VR requests that our haptic device render
tactile sensation on the right hand. The user has escaped the factory.
Haptic design. Although our system has some mechanical
latency and added safety pauses (see 3.3 Safety), we tailored our
game design to overcome it. For instance, to give the coil time to
arrive at the hand (∼3.2 seconds if coming from the furthest away),
the participant hears a charging sound and sees the hand charging
before the plasma shot is fired. This is an example of how haptic
designers create VR situations to set up the user’s mental model
to handle haptic devices that include some latency (e.g., shapechanging devices [34, 90]). Another way to handle latency is to
preemptively schedule an event just before it happens, which we
leverage when the user is hit by the robots (a popular design used
in prior work, e.g., [89] or [17]). Finally, we also took advantage
of events not initiated by the user’s voluntary actions (e.g., the
appearance of the box, the start of enemy firing, spawning new
enemies, and so forth). Thus, we only triggered interactive events
with haptics after the coil was set atop the target position and/or
the completion of the five-second safety interval—a strategy known
as queueing.
7.2 Study Design
Participants. We recruited eight participants (five identified as
male, three as female, average age = 25.3 years, SD = 3.0) from
our institution; three had partaken in our first user study. All
participants were right-handed. Moreover, with the participants’
consent, we videotaped the study. Participants received $30 USD
as compensation.
Procedure. Prior to the VR trial, we calibrated the coil’s position
and the stimulation intensity to induce the visible movements of
the hand, forearm, foot, and lower leg for both sides of the body. We
adjusted the coil position with our motor structure while sending
commands to motors via GUI sliders on our Unity application. After
the calibration, the participant experienced the VR scene. Then we
conducted a semi-structured exit interview.
Interview structure. Our semi-structured interview included
four phases: (1) Overall experience: opener questions about the
overall experience with the device; (2) Open-ended feedback: we
invited participants to provide any comments regarding any aspect
of their experience in the entire study; (3) VR experience: one
question per VR interaction; (4) Future: we invited participants
to share use-case/features they would like to see. In total this
comprised eight questions. Finally, interviews were recorded in
audio (with consent) for transcription.
7.3 Results
We analyzed video-recordings from the VR experiences, depicted in
Figure 9, as well as responses to our interviews. We identified eight
unique topics: (1) surprise, (2) coil, (3) ergonomics, (4) full-body
sensations, (5) force feedback, (6) tactile feedback, (7) unexpected
sensations, and (8) future form-factors & applications.
Surprise. Six participants (out of eight) expressed surprise:
”felt like it’s actually happening. Was impressed[!]” (P5), ”very
surprising”(P2), ”surprise that it works, the location of the sensation
and motion was correct despite the device being on the head (. . .)
hard to imagine that it can work but it does[!]” (P4), and ”is on top
of your head which you wouldn’t expect to be able to move your
hands and feet. It was a little counterintuitive[!]” (P7), ” it is cool
that it is coming directly from your brain. (. . .) [no need to] attach
stuff to other parts of your body” (P6), and ”It felt natural because
there was nothing there, like using my natural hand [versus] using
a glove (. . .) bright future! (. . .) a natural feeling and doesn’t feel
like needles and there is no glue to remove at the end ” (P1).
Feeling the coil movement or coil action. Three participants
(out of eight) recalled feeling the coil’s movement: ”you can kind
of just ignore the movement, all of the feedback was unexpected.
You can’t anticipate the sensation in advance” (P4) or ”[the coil
moving] feels like it’s massaging your head, which is good!” (P6)
and ”the movement of the device could be distracting but the actual
sensations were realistic” (P8). Finally, two participants (out of
eight) commented on feeling the coil’s stimulation ”everything else
[in VR] distracted from it” (P6) and ”felt [haptics] in a specific body
area, sometimes it was covered by the sensation on the skull” (P3).
Device’s ergonomics. Three participants (out of eight) commented on ergonomics: ”a little heavy, but everything else was
fine. It was comfortable aside from the weight. It didn’t feel uncomfortable when was moving around” (P7), ”not really aware of
the moving part but was aware of the heaviness (. . .) but it is a lot
more adaptable, better than putting 10 different things on body”
(P5), ”If there is more weight on the front, it would be better” (P6).
Full-body. All eight participants recalled how they felt all sensations successfully, including tactile and forces on their hands,
feet, and arms during interactions with firing a projectile, stomping
on a box, getting shots on the hands/feet, and pressing the escape
button. For instance, ”felt sensations on the whole body, which
is very convenient. Liked how you only need to calibrate once at
Haptic Source-effector: Full-body Haptics via Non-invasive Brain Stimulation CHI ’24, May 11–16, 2024, Honolulu, HI, USA
Figure 9: Photos of participants’ experiences (reproduced with their consent): feeling the recoil of throwing a projectile (a, b);
stomping on a virtual box (c, d); feeling the impact of a projectile on the hand (e); pressing a virtual button with haptics (f).
the beginning and do not need to calibrate again” (P2; note that
recalibration could be needed depending on the situation).
Strong force feedback. Seven (out of eight) participants commented on the strength of the force feedback, for instance, ”knee
joint bounce [proceeds to make ”boom” sound], it felt strong (…)
like stomping on a rubber ball” (P2, stimulated on leg as they
stomped on the box), ”felt [a] pushback, cool!” (P1, stimulated
on hand as they fired the laser), or ”Felt very strong, maybe because it suddenly moves your foot and you need to balance back.
surprised by the attack [of the robot].” (P4, stimulated on foot), ”
really strong, like a kickback (…) kind of like a recoil”. (P7)— P1,
P4, and P8 went as far as to call the effects felt ”very natural”. The
participant who did not enjoy the haptics mentioned: ”All of the
haptic sensations made sense  [I] just didn’t like them [and
then proceeded to explain that they felt] scared of losing balance
initially [when feeling foot force feedback]” (P6).
Tactile feedback. All eight participants reported feeling tactile
sensations during the VR experience. Two participants (out of
eight) commented that these felt less expressive than the forcebased sensations, ”movement is stronger than tactile” (P2), and
”[feeling shot on hand was] less realistic than laser or stomp [both
force]” (P3).
Unexpected sensations. One participant reported a sensation
that was not force or touch, ”the [foot] sensation was very sudden
(. . .) may have contributed to the burning sensation, made me
realize I got shot” (P2). Also, one participant was surprised by the
involuntary actuation, ”kind of scary. Interesting because I am not
in control” (P1).
Future form-factors & applications. Regarding future applications beyond the VR they experienced, three participants stated,
”Learn to play instruments since hands are free (. . .) or handle
emergency situations [it] can get your attention very quickly” (P4),
”stationary mouse + keyboard games” (P2), and ”use with constant
forces, liquid, wind, etcetera” (P3). Regarding future form factors,
two participants added other ways they would like to experience
our device: ”many coil arrays so no [need for] motor movement [and later added] this could be a structure that carries the coil
without placing the weight on the user” (P2) and ”maybe move the
coil up a couple of centimeters when it is not stimulating” (P1).
In this section, we present our reflections and a potential roadmap
to further exploring this novel idea.
8.1 Roadmap for Technical Limitations
As one of the very first haptic systems making use of TMS as a centralized haptic actuator, our exploration let us engage & measure
several of its current limitations. We believe these current limitations point to significant areas for future research. It is important
to note that many in neuroscience/medicine do not push past these
limitations because, for most of their practical purposes, these are
minor issues (e.g., TMS’ audible noises are a minor nuisance during
TMS-depression therapy). We argue that incentives to push TMS
past its current form factor might have to come from outside of the
medical space. This is perhaps akin to how researchers & industry
in HCI have engineered compact & easy-to-wear EMS stimulators
when compared with medical-grade EMS devices. We argue that
the translation & exploration of TMS in interactive systems might
accelerate & motivate technical advances.
Acoustic noise. Rapidly oscillating magnetic fields create audible coil vibrations. Some advances in noise reduction are possible.
For instance, Peterchev et al. demonstrated a TMS coil that effectively reduces its noise by 19 dB—achieved by altering the coil’s
casing to shift sounds outside the user’s hearing range [67].
Coil ergonomics. TMS coils are larger than most types of nerve
stimulation (e.g., EMS). While participants in our Study#2 wore our
complete system, we believe that this heavyweight may negatively
impact experiences of prolonged use and do not recommend these.
Improving the coil’s form factor is paramount for better wearability.
One approach is altering coil geometries (e.g., single-loop coils
reduce the size by half). Another approach is using smaller
coils designed for small mammals [88], which might still be enough
for applications with weak haptics. With all these, there is a tradeoff
between size/weight and depth of the stimulation.
Stimulator size. Current TMS stimulators are still large, e.g.,
ours measures 46×38×31 cm. This is because, to produce strong
magnetic fields, the capacitor arrays require large power (4600 W
at peak—approximately the energy intake of two hairdryers). At
the current stage, we recommend TMS tethered to the stimulator,
where the user might be free to move around, but limited to the
range of the cable. Despite this, advances in engineering are likely
to improve this. For instance, Sauvage et al. designed a compact
TMS (11×27×29 cm) at 9 kg, which operates on a small 24 V DC
power supply and exhibits an output of 700 mT at 1 Hz (i.e.,
70% of our stimulator’s maximum output).
Alternative mechanical designs. We do not think of our headworn implementation as the only way to realize source-haptics
using TMS. To minimize weight, researchers might explore mounting the coil and the actuation system to the user’s chair (e.g., desktop/sited applications) or suspending them via the ceiling (e.g.,
similar to early VR setups that were heavy, or large free-moving
VR arenas). Alternatively, if the stimulation points are predefined
for a given application, one could replace the robotic actuators with
a fixed mount. Particularly, for single-point stimulation, a coil on a
helmet could reduce weight. For multi-point stimulation, a helmet with multiple fixed coils might also be beneficial. All these
non-motorized approaches also eliminate the latency associated
with our approach’s mechanical actuation of the coil. However,
this comes at the cost of stimulation resolution, which is limited by
the coil’s size (e.g., 5 cm steps in vs. our <8.5 mm steps via our
actuators).
Limited sensations. While we confirmed that our approach
can create a total of 15 haptic sensations including both force &
touch, it still has limitations. For instance, the spatial resolution
of haptic feedback via TMS is influenced by the size of the coil’s
focal point (e.g., ∼1 cm radius with the butterfly coil we used).
While this can be smaller than ∼5 mm by optimizing the coil geometry, one has to note that a smaller focal point is a tradeoff
to the stimulation depth. This poses challenges in rendering focused tactile cues in small skin areas, e.g., multiple tactile
points on the fingerpad. At this stage, this is not possible with
existing non-invasive stimulation techniques such as TMS (and,
instead, necessitates turning to invasive intracortical stimulation). However, it is important to note that the upper bound of
TMS’ spatial resolution is yet to be fully understood (see 8.2 Stimuli
design and understanding). Additionally, by limiting the stimulation
duration (see 3.3 Safety), our force sensations are impact-like (i.e.,
applied for a short duration) and not sustained forces. Also, as
previously discussed, our touch sensations are less prominent than
forces due to the difficulties in stimulating somatosensory neurons,
compared to motor neurons.
Now that we have discussed the challenges brought by our specific
implementation using TMS, we turn our attention back to the wider
concept of a centralized haptic actuator worn by the user (i.e., a
source-effector).
Closing the loop. One possible reason why we observed some
of our limitations (e.g., fewer points for touch sensations, or even
less strength for touch than forces) might be related to the lack
of a closed-loop system. In other words, during calibration, it is
easy to accurately determine if a force occurred (i.e., it causes a
visible contraction of a muscle) but the same cannot be said for
touch. One way that future researchers might tackle this is by
attempting to close the loop on the stimulation. This might be done
by first scanning participants via MRI to obtain a more precise map
of regions that should be stimulated for this particular participant.
Stimuli design and understanding. While our system can
create 15 distinct haptic sensations, this observation is specific
to our current actuation resolution (8.5 mm). We hope that our
findings facilitate exploration of the upper bound of how many
different points across the body TMS can deliver haptics. Possible
strategies for this include defining finer grids for coil positioning
or implementing the aforementioned MRI-based approach to accurately identify cortical regions. Moreover, broadening the range of
haptic sensations—such as different textures or even pressure—is
also a promising avenue for future research. One way to approach
this is to explore different TMS pulse parameters (e.g., pulse width,
frequency, and waveform) and evaluate elicited sensations
through psychophysics studies, akin to methods employed in the
domain of surface electrical stimulation.
Beyond TMS. Finally, we hope our work inspires new implementations of this concept of a source-effector. One promising avenue
is via the aforementioned transcranial ultrasound stimulation—
despite its still nascent status, it might offer some avenue to mitigate the size of the TMS coils. However, its accuracy & limitations
are still being understood.
CONCLUSION
We proposed, implemented & evaluated a novel concept for haptics
in which one centralized on-body haptic actuator renders haptic effects on multiple body parts—we called this a haptic source-effector.
We implement it by leveraging transcranial magnetic stimulation
(TMS). We can render touch/force-feedback in hands, arms, legs,
feet, and jaw—without needing to instrument these with individual
actuators—which we validated in our first user study. In the sourceeffector, a single magnetic coil moves mechanically across the scalp.
For instance, if the user is meant to feel haptics in their hand, the
coil is moved and stimulates the area of their sensorimotor cortex
where hand sensations are processed. In our second user study,
we probed into participants’ experiences while using our haptic
display in an interactive VR experience.
Finally, as a first implementation of TMS-based haptics, we thoroughly discussed its limitations and proposed a roadmap to further
its use in interactive contexts.