ABSTRACT
We propose a novel concept for haptics in which one centralized
on-body actuator renders haptic effects on multiple body parts by
stimulating the brain, i.e., the source of the nervous system—we call
this a haptic source-effector, as opposed to the traditional wearables’
approach of attaching one actuator per body part (end-effectors).
We implement our concept via transcranial-magnetic-stimulation
(TMS)—a non-invasive technique from neuroscience/medicine in
which electromagnetic pulses safely stimulate brain areas. Our
approach renders ∼15 touch/force-feedback sensations throughout
the body (e.g., hands, arms, legs, feet, and jaw—which we found
in our first user study), all by stimulating the user’s sensorimotor cortex with a single magnetic coil moved mechanically across
the scalp. In our second user study, we probed into participants’
experiences while using our haptic display in VR. Finally, as the

INTRODUCTION
Enabling users to leverage all their senses while immersed in interactive experiences has been one of the driving visions in HumanComputer Interaction—as Sutherland put it “[the interface] should
CHI ’24, May 11–16, 2024, Honolulu, HI, USA Yudai Tanaka et al.
serve as many senses as possible” [80]. To this date, an immense
body of work in haptics has engineered specialized actuators to
deliver skin sensations to the user’s body (e.g., contact , texture, pressure ).
The overwhelming majority of haptic devices are engineered
using the same principle, i.e., an actuator is mounted atop the
part of the skin that is meant to be stimulated, e.g., finger-worn
haptic devices deliver tactile cues to the fingerpad,
foot-worn devices deliver tactile cues to the soles, headworn devices deliver tactile cues to the face, and so forth—
this approach can also be referred to as haptic end-effector,
a term borrowed from robotics literature, where it denotes how
the actuator is attached at the very endpoint of a robotic extremity.
Similarly, in this context, a haptic end-effector denotes how the
actuator is attached at the very endpoint of the user’s nervous
system, e.g., a vibration motor attached atop the tactile receptors
at one’s fingertips. Users feel haptic sensations delivered by
end-effectors via the following process: (1) mechanical stimuli
are translated to electrical impulses (by mechanoreceptors at the
endpoint), (2) electricalsignals propagate via the peripheral nervous
system (via neurons from limbs to the spinal cord), and, finally, (3)
signals are processed in the source location where all the neurons
flow (i.e., the brain, in particular, the somatosensory cortex).
This end-effector approach has been successful in that devices
can deliver precise temporal and spatial cues. However, few examples of these devices lend themselves well to full-body haptic
experiences, which reveals a research question to which our field
has not found new answers: how might we scale up haptic devices
given that the current approach requires many devices to render
sensations on many locations of the user’s body?
Thus, to propose a new approach, we take the inverse conceptual
turn. Instead of placing haptic end-effectors on the endpoints of the
user’s nervous system, we propose delivering full-body haptics via
a single haptic device that directly stimulates the user’s brain areas
responsible for creating haptic sensations—we call this a sourceeffector.
To create the first instantiation of this concept, we turned to transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS)—a technique from medicine
that allows for safe & non-invasive brain stimulation. To translate the TMS technique into readily usable knowledge for humancomputerinteraction, we (1) characterized, by means of a userstudy,
which areas of the body TMS can elicit haptic sensations; then, (2)
engineered a haptic device that sits atop the user’s head and is able
to position the TMS coil at strategic locations to generate haptic
sensations (i.e., either touch or touch & force) in nine locations of
the users’ body: hands, arms, legs, feet, and jaw, as shown in Figure
1—all by stimulating the user’s sensorimotor cortex with a single
magnetic-coil moved mechanically across the scalp; furthermore,
(3) we characterized, by means of a second user study, the user
experience created by our device in a virtual reality application;
finally, (4) we mapped out the possible evolution of this concept,
including its hardware challenges.
Finally, we see this approach as the first step towards exploring new methods to scale haptic feedback to multiple body areas
without encumbering users’ bodies. Naturally, as a first step in this
direction, our current implementation using transcranial magnetic
stimulation is not without shortcomings. We will discuss these in
detail later as we believe they are crucial for identifying the next
research challenges to be tackled. However, we believe that our
work provides technical insights that will inspire researchers to
explore new approaches for haptics.

RELATED WORK
Our work is built primarily on approaches towards full-body haptic
feedback, which we organize by their conceptual takes on delivering
haptic sensations: to the endpoint (e.g., attaching a haptic endeffector to the palm, or even sending an air) or to a midpoint (e.g.,
electrically stimulating nerves in the arm to create touch on the
palm). We discuss the differences between these approaches and
our source-effector. Finally, since our approach is one of the very
few that makes use of transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS)
in an interactive context, we briefly review the working principle
behind this non-invasive brain stimulation technique.
2.1 Full-body Haptic Feedback by Stimulating
the Endpoint
N:N haptics (N actuators, N locations): The most popular way
to realize full-body haptics has been to attach an actuator per location where a sensation should be felt—hence N:N haptics. Some
of the first explorations of this approach date back to the 1990s,
when researchers used 10 vibrotactile actuators placed at the hands,
feet, legs, and head. Later, Lindeman et al. took this further
with 16 vibrators, even including solenoids and fans. Because
attaching/removing individual actuators on many parts of one’s
body is extremely time-consuming for the user and requires many
fixation points that encumber the user (e.g., straps), researchers
opt to integrate these vibrotactile actuators in haptic suits—both and are canonical examples of haptic suits, while many
more exist in research and even in industry (e.g., bHaptics). This haptic-suit approach improves wearability & comfort
by trading it off with design flexibility (e.g., it is harder to reconfigure the location of the devices depending on body size, individual
preferences, goals of the application, and so forth).
1:N haptics (1 actuator, N locations): Counter to the previous approach, an emergent and more experimental way to deliver
haptics to the endpoint, is to use a single actuator. In these systems, there is only one actuator but the user feels sensations in
multiple locations—hence 1:N haptics. One way to enable this is
to utilize the air around the user: as demonstrated by AIREAL, an
air vortex that stimulates the skin up to 1 m away. This approach has been then extended to present tactile sensations at the
head, shoulders, and legs. Another approach is to attach
a single haptic actuator to an endpoint but then move it mechanically to reach different limbs. For instance, Calico is an on-cloth
robotic platform that moves a small end-effector across the user’s
clothes, providing vibrations from arms to legs. As emergent
techniques, these are not without limitations. In the case of air
vortexes, these require line of sight, intensity decays over distance,
and have a limited interactive volume, etc. Conversely, moving
wearables on the body is relatively slow and can require rails added
to one’s clothing, etc. Most importantly, all of these techniques
cannot deliver force feedback—these provide only tactile cues (e.g.,
soft puffs of air or vibrations). That said, these devices conceptually
align with our goal, i.e., building a centralized haptic device capable
of delivering haptics to multiple locations. In addition, these are
flexible in adding new points of sensation easily (i.e., pointing the
air cannon or moving the on-body robot). Thus, we are inspired by
these centralized devices, yet seek to explore a novel approach that
breaks away from having to stimulate the endpoint.
2.2 Haptic Feedback by Stimulating the
Midpoint (Peripheral Nerves)
An approach, which we draw inspiration from, is to create sensations in a target area, but using actuators attached to another patch
of skin that communicate via peripheral nerves. These techniques
typically work by electrically stimulating nerves to induce sensations ”remotely” at the endpoint of this nerve. This can take the
form of touch-feedback (electro-tactile) or force-feedback stimulation (electrical muscle stimulation).
Tactile sensations from the midpoint. One way to create
tactile sensations without attaching a haptic end-effector to the
endpoint is to stimulate the nerve that leads to it—this is known
as inducing a referred sensation, i.e., “somatosensory feelings that
are perceived to emanate from a body part other than, but in association with, the body part being stimulated”. While this
was initially only explored in prosthetics to provide tactile feedback to the prosthetic hands or feet of amputees, it
has also been adapted to enable users to feel tactile sensations in
their hands or fingerpads without attaching electrodes directly to
these areas; instead, electrodes are placed on the wrist to create
sensations in the hand, or other strategic locations more
proximal to the peripheral nerves such as the back-side of the hand, palm, or base of the fingers to induce sensations
in the fingerpads.
Force feedback from the midpoint. Similar to this, with
electrical muscle stimulation (EMS), it is possible to create force
feedback without requiring mechanical actuators (e.g., motors or
exoskeletons). Electrical impulses are sent to electrodes placed atop
a muscle (midpoint), which in turn cause a movement on the limb
(endpoint). For example, stimulating the forearm can cause the
fingers or the wrist to move. Similarly, stimulating
the neck can move the head , or even stimulating the calf 
or thigh can move the foot.
Pushing past the midpoint. While we take inspiration from
these techniques, we ask the natural question: how would an interactive system look like if we moved past the midpoint? The logical
consequence of this is to actuate the source of the nervous system,
i.e., the user’s brain, to generate sensations even at larger distances
and from a centralized haptic device. To find a suitable method to
stimulate the brain, we turn to the field of neuroscience where a
number of brain stimulation techniques are used in research & therapeutics. There are several established techniques to achieve this,
however, they range in their applicability outside of the medical
domain. First, invasive techniques involve implanting electrodes in
the brain, via a surgical procedure. Given thisstringentrequirement
of implantation, this technique (known as intracortical microstimulation) is typically used for extreme medical cases, such as
researching prosthetics with tactile feedback for amputees.
On the other side of the spectrum stand non-invasive techniques,
which trade off accuracy for safety and wide applicability. One
such non-invasive technique that has been extensively explored for
the last decades is transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS).
Before we turn into the details of this technique, we note that TMS
is not the only non-invasive brain stimulation approach; others
include transcranial direct-current stimulation or transcranial
focused ultrasound stimulation (tFUS). With regards to tDCS,
it is a neuromodulation technique that uses small electrical currents
delivered via electrodes on the scalp; as a modulation technique, it
typically does not have the accuracy nor amplitude to induce haptic
sensations and is used for neuropsychiatric conditions. On
the other hand, tFUS is a nascent stimulation technique that uses
focused ultrasound, delivered by a transducer placed atop the scalp. While tFUS might eventually resolve some limitations of TMS
(which we will discuss later in detail, e.g., device weight), its safety
protocols and guidelines are still under development, unlike those
of TMS, which have been established for decades. Therefore,
we decided to implement our concept using TMS.
2.3 Transcranial Magnetic Stimulation
Transcranial Magnetic Stimulation (TMS). TMS is a technique
that originated in medicine/neuroscience, in which a magnetic
coil placed atop the user’s head produces a magnetic field that oscillates rapidly. This, in turn, creates electrical currents, known
as eddy currents, inside the brain, without the need for implanted cables or electrodes [24] (as with other brain stimulation
techniques)—it is thus, non-invasive.
TMS in neuroscience as a toolto understand brain function.
TMS has been popularized as a tool for neuroscience since first
demonstrated by Barker et al. in 1985. It is frequently used
to map brain functions to cortical areas, e.g., motor control,
vision, language processing, working memory, and
more.
TMS as a medical intervention/treatment. TMS has also
been extensively used as therapy for improving motor function in
Parkinson’s patients, reducing epileptic seizures, and as a
depression treatment.
Peripheral magnetic stimulation (e.g., muscles or touch).
While magnetic stimulation finds its primary use in stimulating the
brain, it can also be used for peripheral nerves, placing its coil atop
muscles (similar to EMS) or skin (similar to electro-tactile). While
the latter (tactile) is rather rare, it has been used for creating tactile
sensations in mid-air without the need for direct contact.
The former (magnetic muscle stimulation), has been used for muscle
rehabilitation, gaiting, and even swallowing. Moreover,
recently, it has also been used for interactive force-feedback.
It is worth noting that, unlike TMS, these magnetic skin/muscle
actuation systems create sensations by stimulating the periphery—
these are still midpoint approaches.
TMS in interactive systems. Although it is known that TMS
applied to the motor cortex induces limb movement and/or
touch sensations in the hand, its presence in human-computer
interaction remainslimited. Recently, Bassolino et al. demonstrated
that TMS to the motor cortex improves the sense of embodiment
in a VR rubber hand illusion. While this implies the utility of
haptic feedback via TMS, to our knowledge, there have been no
3 IMPLEMENTING SOURCE-EFFECTOR VIA
TMS
To help readers replicate our design, we now provide the necessary
technical details (hardware & software), alongside a discussion of
important safety considerations for any future interactive system
based on TMS. Furthermore, to accelerate replication, we provide
all the source code & hardware of our implementation1
Design rationale. As the first instantiation of the concept of a
head-worn centralized haptic device, we focused on understanding
the range of sensations & locations that can be created using TMS
rather than optimizing for form-factor or ergonomics. As such, we
opted to implement a versatile design that could move a powerful
medical-grade TMS coil. This gave us maximum flexibility in our
findings, as the coil has excellent stimulation depth; in other words,
using smaller coils would result in a smaller device, but would not
allow us to learn the full range of haptics that TMS can unleash.
Now that we know the range of haptics that can be generated via
TMS (Study#1) and the afforded user experiences (Study#2), we
are poised to also explore new design trade-offs. These include the
potential use of multiple smaller coils rather than moving a single
powerful coil, which we will discuss later.
3.1 Hardware Implementation
We engineered the actuation system shown in Figure 2, capable of
moving a TMS coil (Magstim D702 butterfly coil) around the user’s
head, which is connected to a medical-grade magnetic stimulator
(Magstim Super Rapid2).
Robotic platform. The key component in our hardware implementation is a robotic gantry that mechanically moves the TMS
coil across key areas of the user’s scalp. Our design is inspired by
a traditional X-Y-Z gantry system commonly found in CNC machines, but with key modifications that allow it to: (1) most
importantly, conform to the curvature of the scalp around the pitch
axis (i.e., front/back), which is estimated to be ∼18 degrees for
the sensorimotor cortex area, based on our measurement from a
standard head shape dataset; (2) accommodate different heads,
including different curvatures and sizes; (3) actuate with sufficient
force to move a medical-grade TMS coil (∼1 kg); (4) actuate with
steps smaller than 8.5 mm, as determined by our Study#1; and, finally, (5) provide a structure that can be either directly mounted to a
VR headset or suspended from the ceiling (as in). To satisfy
these requirements we engineered the actuation system shown in
Figure 2.
Actuators. We feature three actuators, respectively, to move the
coil in the X- (ear-to-ear translation), Y- (nose-to-back translation),
and Z- (height away from the scalp) axes. Since the X-axis exhibits
most curvature as the coil moves towards the ear, we actuate it
via a servo motor (Feetech FT5335M; maximum torque=392N·cm)
with a built-in encoder, this offers a reliable, fairly compact, strong
way to actuate the coil—as the coil moves closer to the ear it exerts
more torque force to the servo lever. As we found in our technical evaluation, we can move the servo reliably & repeatably at
4.2 mm steps. For the Z-axis (height away from the scalp) we employ a linear actuator (Actuonix L16-P; gear ratio=63:1; maximum
load=100N) with a built-in encoder, mounted directly to the lever of
the aforementioned servo. Finally, for the Y-axis (as the coil moves
from nose to back) we also use a linear motor (Actuonix P8-P; gear
ratio=165:1; maximum load=110N) with a built-in encoder. The
Y-axis is mounted to the endpoint of the Z-axis actuator and, ultimately, holds the coil via a custom metallic adaptor. As we found
in our technical evaluation, we can move the Y- and Z- actuators
reliably & repeatably at 1.9 mm and 2.6 mm steps respectively. So
far, what we described is a typical gantry (with carefully chosen
actuators that are strong enough to move the TMS coil), however,
with the standard design with fixed perpendicular axes, we would
not be able to account for the head’s curvature. This would require
at least adding more actuators to tilt the coil. Instead, to avoid more
actuators, we opted to build a structure with passive mechanisms.
In the following, we describe the structural elements that make this
possible.
Structural elements. To account for curvature, the Z-axis
needs to be lifted as the coil traverses the head. One option, that
we explored in the early phase of the engineering, was to let the
coil hang entirely at the end of the Y-axis, with no further structure
to support it. This is similar to some CNC machines that optimize
for space and do not feature two rails per degree of freedom (e.g.,
EasyThreed X1). However, we noted this increased the slack and
backlash due to the coil’s weight. As such, we added a mount on
the faceplate of the VR headset (Meta Quest 2), which is depicted
in Figure 2. The faceplate was drilled and secured to our custom
mount using M4 screws and a ball bearing. To enable movement
with the new mount point, we incorporated a passive mechanism
comprised of linear rails and bearings (Figure 2). This design allows
the Z-axis linear actuation to tilt the coil around the pitch axis,
adapting to the nose-to-back curvature of the scalp. Lastly, the
secondary mount attaches to the back of the VR headset’s strap
using a custom 3D-printed bracket.
Alternative designs. Many other designs are certainly possible
and ours depicts one possibility. For instance, one could add a
hemispheric rail connecting the sides of the VR headset’s strap to a
passive rail, thus guiding the coil with greater precision. However,
after experimenting with this, we noted that this also has drawbacks:
(1) it prevents the headset’s strap-size adjustment from working,
rendering oursystem fixed in size unlike our current design (i.e., the
rails properly slide asthe user adjuststhe headset for theirsize); and
(2) It restricts the coil’s movement to a single line over the cortex,
eliminating the possibility of diagonal movement. Additionally, it
is important to note that our evaluation showed our system has
already achieved sufficient accuracy to stimulate the sensations
found in Study#1.
3.2 Software Implementation
To control our medical-grade TMS stimulator, we implemented a
custom middleware via MagPy Python Toolbox, which routed
serial communication to the stimulator and received Open Sound
Control (OSC) commands. Our main applications for both studies
ran on Unity3D, which dispatched OSC commands to our custom
middleware for TMS, and serial commands to a SAMD21-XIAO
microcontroller connected to the motors and encoders. For tracking
the hands and feet, we used HTC VIVE 3.0 Trackers attached to the
user’s extremities, and integrated their tracking information into
Quest 2’s headset tracking using Open VR Space Calibrator.
Stimulation flow. When a VR experience requests feedback,
the following process triggers the stimulation: the Unity3D application communicates the required stimulation intensity to the Python
middleware via OSC, which is then conveyed to the stimulator as a
serial command using MagPy. As a result, the stimulator charges its
capacitor arrays at the requested intensity. In parallel, the Unity3D
application also sends serial commands to the motor controller to
move the coil to a target area. Once the coil hasreached the position
and five seconds have elapsed since the previous stimulation (see
3.3 Safety), the Unity3D application sends another OSC command
to our middleware to trigger the TMS stimulation using three consecutive 300-`s biphasic cosine cycle pulses, each separated
by a 50-millisecond interval. Finally, the resulting current flow
through the coil creates the oscillating magnetic field, delivering
the stimulation to the target brain region.
3.3 Safety
Risks of TMS. Like any other electrical or brain stimulation technique, TMS is not without its associated risks. These are primarily
local skin-tingling at the scalp or magnetic interference with implanted devices, which can be avoided through user screening and
the proper selection of stimulation parameters. Moreover, according to a set of safety & ethics guidelines for TMS released in
2021, as long as TMS is applied to subjects without epilepsy,
no lasting adverse events (e.g., seizures) have been reported. This
claim is further supported by a comprehensive review of TMS, including long-term use of up to 26 months. TMS is also an
FDA (Food and Drug Administration) approved technique for therapeutic purposes. The minimal risk of TMS is ensured by
properly screening the population and limiting stimulation within
the known safety range.
User screening. In adherence to the safety guidelines,
we strictly applied the following user eligibility criteria. First, we
did not recruit participants with medical conditions that could increase the risks associated with TMS (i.e., epilepsy, or history of
seizures). Second, in line with the safety guidelines for fMRI,
we did not recruit participants with implanted devices (e.g., pacemakers, metal implants) to prevent unintended interactions with
the electromagnetic field generated by the coil. We also ensured
ethical compliance by obtaining informed consent from participants prior to using our device—overall, these screening criteria
are mostly analogous to those for EMS.
Stimulation parameters. Rossi et al.’s guidelines provide a
range of stimulation parameters that ensure minimal risks during
TMS. These specify the maximum stimulation duration and
the necessary break period between stimulations as a function of
the stimulation frequency. For instance, for a 20 Hz stimulation,
the guidelines prescribe a safe continuous stimulation up to 400
ms (i.e., 8 consecutive pulses). Following this guideline, we use
the stimulation parameter of three consecutive pulses with 50 ms
intervals—a conservative & safe approach using less than half of
the maximum pulse count that is deemed safe. Moreover, for these
stimulation parameters, Rossi et al. further recommend adding a
five-second break between stimulation sequences. As such, our
software apparatus does not allow the TMS stimulation to be reactivated unless five seconds have elapsed prior to the preceding
stimulation. This additional safety was also incorporated into our
VR experience used in Study#2, by adjusting aspects such as the
timing of the enemy’s attacks or charge-up duration for the user’s
projectile launcher.
4 TECHNICAL EVALUATION
We conducted two technical characterizations: (1) device characterization (i.e., end-to-end latency, noise, weight), and (2) actuation characterization (i.e., accuracy in moving the coil on the
user’s scalp).
4.1 Device Characterization
End-to-end latency. We measured an end-to-end latency of 16 ms
using a 240fps camera that also recorded sound—this is a complete
round-trip, from an event in Unity3D to the audible sound of a TMS
pulse. For simplification, the coil was already at the target, we will
later characterize the actuation speed delay while moving the coil.
Operating noise. We measured the sound generated by our
TMS using a decibel meter (AS824) placed at the height of a user’s
ear (ten repetitions). We measured an average peak of 79.8 dB at the
average TMS intensity used in Study#2 (actuating the leg, which
requires the most amplitude). In comparison, haptic devices such as
propeller-based tend to be louder (e.g., produces up to 95.3dB).
Also, propeller-based devices actuate for several seconds or even
stay on for minutes, instead, our TMS produces sounds for only
150 ms.
Device weight. The total weight of the device is 3.1 kg (measured with a Camry Digital Scale, 50g resolution), which consists
of 1.1 kg from the effective weight of the TMS coil when worn
and connected to the stimulator and 2.0 kg from our mechanical
actuators, rails, and attachments.
4.2 Coil Actuation Characterization
As we willsee in our Study#1, we observed that the shortest distance
between adjacent locations on participants’ scalps that correspond
to haptics on different limbs, was approximately 17 mm. Consequently, we required an actuator that meets this level of precision,
ideally with a resolution of at least half that distance, i.e., 8.5 mm.
Measurement setup. All the evaluation in this section was
conducted with a HTC VIVE 3.0 tracker (with a tracking accuracy
of 0.3 mm [7]) attached to the coil of our complete system worn by
a mannequin head. We used our Unity3D application
to control the motors while recording the tracker’s position. Note
that the positional difference between the tracker and the center
of the coil was compensated via an offset applied in the Unity3D
spatial coordinates.
Range of motion. We characterized the range of motion for
each motor axis. We found that the rotation of the servo motor
(X-axis) spans 24 cm across the head. The actuation range of the
Y-axis linear actuator equates to 7.4 cm across the head, and the
Z-axis linear actuator’s range corresponds to a 24-degree tilt of the
coil in the pitch axis.
Minimum step-size. We characterized the step-sizes that the
coil can robustly move on the scalp using its servos and linear
actuators, which we found to be: 4.2 mm, 1.9 mm, and 2.6 mm for
the X-, Y-, and Z-axes respectively.
Actuation consistency. The most important factor is the ability
to consistently replicate target coil positions multiple times after
calibration, i.e., measuring the motors’ drift. For this test, we instructed the system to actuate to eight known targets in the four
cardinal directions at two distances that were pre-defined. In these
measurements, the coil was first set to the initial position where the
center of the coil coincided with the center of the mannequin’sscalp.
Then, the coil was actuated at the speed employed in our Study#2
(50mm/s on X-axis, 8mm/s on Y-axis, and 18mm/s on Z-axis), After
stopping, we calculated the error. We repeated this 10 times for
each target to obtain a variability, as a metric of robustness. Figure
3 (b) shows our results. We found that the average error across the
targets was 1.4 mm (SD=0.7) on the X-axis (left/right) and 1.5 mm
(SD=0.4) on the Y-axis (front/back). Consequently, this actuation
consistency, along with the minimum step sizes, confirmed that
our system surpasses the required precision of 8.5 mm.
Actuation latency. We measured the time that our actuation
system would require in a worst-case scenario, where the coil needs
to travel from the jaw location on the left side to its counterpart on
the right. Drawing from the average unit distance between different
stimulation targets on the scalp as determined in our Study#1, we
set the distance for this case to be 13.6 cm. We found it takes 3.2
seconds for our system to cover this furthest distance.
5 CONTRIBUTION, BENEFITS & LIMITATIONS
Our key contribution is a novel interface concept, haptic sourceeffector, which we explore as an alternative direction to scaling
haptic interfaces to be able to render full-body sensations from a
centralized on-body device.
Our approach has four key benefits: (1) One actuator for fullbody haptics: unlike haptic systems created by a constellation of
many devices, our implementation has only one centralized point
of contact with the user’s brain; this is beneficial in that it demonstrates a path forward to scaling haptics without the complexities
associated with wearing many actuators. (2) Easily reconfigurable: as our TMS coil moves over the user’s scalp, it gains access
to eliciting tactile/force sensations across many parts of the user’s
Haptic Source-effector: Full-body Haptics via Non-invasive Brain Stimulation CHI ’24, May 11–16, 2024, Honolulu, HI, USA
body, thus the device can reconfigure by moving to a new stimulation location of the user’s brain—contrast the distance that an
actuator would have to be moved if swapped from hands to feet
(source-effector’s movement on the scalp is 50-times smaller than
that). (3) Freeing up the body: because source-effector only sits
on the head, it frees up the rest of the body from hardware—no
need to wear end-effectors which would otherwise limit the user’s
ability to feel sensations in their hands or feet; (4) Force & touch:
since any sensory information takes the form of electrical currents
passing through neurons in the brain, our approach renders both
touch & forces—two different modalities that conventionally require two different types of actuators (e.g., vibrotactile motors and
force-based exoskeletons).
Limitations. We acknowledge that our current implementation
of source-effector based on TMS has its limitations and every benefit has associated caveats. First, while our concept is novel in that a
single point of instrumentation can realize haptics in many body
locations, this instrumentation is currently heavy. Second, this
point of instrumentation leaves plenty to be optimized for in terms
of comfort (not only total weight but distribution of weight too).
Third, while this haptic actuator is unique in its ability to reconfigure to stimulate new body locations, the fundamental limits of TMS
dictate the expressivity of this approach—like any other technique
based on stimulating neurons, TMS is also non-selective, i.e., electrical eddy currents traverse through many neurons at once, which
limits induced sensations (i.e., touch & forces, but not thermal),
limits spatial fidelity (i.e., we cannot stimulate small brain areas
and those corresponding to high thresholds such as the torso), and
modality isolation (e.g., force-feedback occurs with touch). Moreover, we discuss more detailed limitations in our roadmap as we
believe that these point to a set of challenges worth pursuing to
further unlock TMS’ interactive potential.
Finally, we reflect on the nature of our proposal: the TMS technique we employed is not new—it originates from neuroscience and
medicine as a method to understand our brain function. However,
the value of our proposal also lies in the translation of this medical
tool as a new way for full-body haptics. In fact, similar translational
efforts have previously advanced our field, e.g., the PossessedHand
[69] translated a 50-year-old medical tool (i.e., EMS) into our field,
leading to a growth in force-feedback research. Likewise, our effort
is the first to translate transcranial magnetic stimulation from the
realm of neuroscience into new knowledge for designing brainhaptic systems.
6 STUDY#1: GENERATING HAPTIC
SENSATIONS ACROSS THE BODY WITH
BRAIN STIMULATION
In our first study, we focused on characterizing the range of our
source-effector concept when implemented by means of medicalgrade transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS), by measuring: (1)
in what locations can haptic sensations be created using TMS? and,
(2) what types of haptic sensations can TMS create?
As such, a TMS-trained experimenter stimulated the nine predefined locations on the right hemisphere of participants’ sensorimotor cortex using TMS, while participants reported where they
felt sensations and the strongest point of tactile sensation, as well
as observing any resulting limb movements—this study design was
based on traditional neuroscientific methods used by prior work to
investigate motor responses to TMS , as well as perceived
locations or qualities of electro-tactile stimulation.
The study was approved by our Institutional Review Board (IRB21-
0055).
6.1 Study Design
Participants. We recruited 12 participants from our institution
(7 identified as male, 5 as female, average age = 23.2 years, SD =
2.2). All participants were right-handed. The participants were
compensated with $30 USD.
Apparatus. We used a medically compliant magnetic stimulator
(Magstim Super Rapid2) with a butterfly coil (Magstim D702). The
participant sat in a reclined chair, wearing earplugs and a white
fabric cap on their scalp, which allowed the experimenter to mark
the stimulation locations prior to actual trials. For reporting elicited
touch sensations, we provided participants with an iPad and Apple
pencil running our GUI application. This enabled them to draw the
perceived sensation area on front/back views of a human model.
They reported the quality of the sensation by selecting from the
following six keywords: “tapping”, “vibrating”, “tingling”, “pressing”, “skin-stretching”, and “thermal”. For evaluating force feedback
from TMS, we video-recorded participants throughout the study
and post-annotated any involuntary joint movements via TMS that
occurred during each trial.
Stimulation. We stimulated the right hemisphere of the sensorimotor cortex (corresponding to the left side of the body) with
three consecutive 320 `s TMS pulses separated by 50 ms, resulting
in a stimulation of ∼150 ms. While we opted to only stimulate the
right side of the brain to avoid fatigue, the results will be generalizable to the left side. In fact, we purposefully picked this side
because it allowed us to measure the worst-case scenario since the
other side (dominant side) of the brain is known more sensitive to
TMS.
Defining the stimulation locations. We identified two locations on the participant’s scalp that yielded minimum stimulation
intensitiesto elicit observable limb movement (i.e., motor threshold)
for the hand and foot. For this, the experimenter moved the coil
following the grid-search method used by Franza et al., while
adjusting the intensity based on Awiszus’ method. After setting
the hand and foot locations, we defined the final nine locations on
a line between them. These were equidistant at one-sixth of the
distance between the hand and foot locations.
Procedure. We started trials at the foot location. For each location, the intensity was set to 10% below the hand’s motor threshold.
The amplitude of TMS stimulation wasreported in percentage (100%
is the stimulator’s maximum). During a trial, the experimenter stimulated the target location. Afterward, the participant reported the
strongest point and area of a perceived touch as well as a keyword
(or if nothing was felt). Then, the experimenter increased the intensity by 5% while ensuring the participant’s comfort & consent, and
moved to the next trial. This process continued until the participant
reported the same location and same quality of sensations for two
consecutive trials, or the intensity reached the maximum (i.e., 100%).
At that point, the procedure advanced to the next location.
6.2 Results
Overview. Figure 4 depicts an overview summarizing the body
locations where we were able to induce touch and/or movement
in participants. Overall, these results suggest that we were able
to induce touch sensations without body movement in two
locations (hand & foot), and involuntary body movement accompanied with or without touch in six locations (fingers,
hand, forearm, lower leg, foot, and jaw). Moreover, it is worth
noting that we only actuated the right hemisphere of their cortex
corresponding to the non-dominant hand side of the body for the
sake of participants’ time (study durations of up to 1.5 hours). On
Figure 5: (a, b) Extracted raw data of where the participants
felt touch sensations in the hand and foot. (c) Quality of the
sensations.
this note, neuroscience research suggests that it is more challenging to induce somatosensory responses in the side we actuated
(non-dominant) via TMS [92]—thus, these results are expected to
generalize even better to the other side. When accounting for both
sides of the user’s body, this brings the haptic sensations that can be
induced by TMS to a total of 15 sensations with a single actuator:
four touch sensations and eleven force-feedback sensations. Note
that we regarded jaw movement as one sensation. In the following,
we analyze each modality (i.e., touch / force-feedback) in more
detail.
Touch. Results suggest that we were able to induce, by means of
TMS, touch sensations(i.e., only tactile in isolation of any noticeable
movements) in two unique locations: hand and foot, which were
both experienced by 75% of the participants (i.e., nine participants).
The next most promising area was found to be touch on any of the
four fingers, experienced by 67% of participants, which we did not
find to meet our criteria. Now, we turn to where in the hand or foot
these touch sensations occurred. For this purpose, for each of the
nine participants who reported sensations in these areas, we plotted
raw data from one trial where they felt the strongest touch sensation
in these areas. As shown in Figure 5 (a, b), TMS could induce the
sensations on the front side of the hand or the either side of the foot,
meaning no simultaneous sensations were observed in other areas.
Moreover, we found that these tactile sensations had spectrum of
quality with the majority being described as “tapping” (33%) or
“vibrating” (33%), and less often as “tingling” (11%), “pressing” (11%,
22%) or stretching (11%, 0%)—as depicted in Figure 5 (c).
Force-feedback. As shown in Figure 4, our results suggest that
we were able to induce, by means of TMS, force-feedback sensations
(i.e., noticeable involuntary movements) in six unique locations:
jaw (75%), forearm (100%), hand (92%), fingers (83%), lower-leg
(92%), and foot (92%), which were all experienced by >75% of the
participants. In fact, most of the actuated limbs were observed in
almost all participants (>90%) except for the jaw (75%) and fingers
(83%). The next most promising candidate would be the upper leg
(58%), which we did not find to meet our criteria. Furthermore,
all these force-feedback sensations were associated with touch
at the same location (e.g., if the hand was actuated involuntarily,
there was touch felt & reported on the hand), except for the jaw
movements. Jaw movements were observed to be isolated from
touch sensations (i.e., only movement was observed). Moreover,
while the jaw movement was likely also unilateral (i.e., it moved
the left side of the jaw more than the right) its effect was perceived
by participants as one single movement, i.e., jaw clenching on both
sides; hence, we only consider this as a single haptic sensation.
Correspondence to the brain areas. Next, we analyze which
locations of the sensorimotor cortex were more effective in creating
haptic sensations. Figure 6 depictsthe brain region that we targeted,
with a line emphasizing the principal axis of the sensorimotor
cortex, which was defined for each participant prior to trials. From
Haptic Source-effector: Full-body Haptics via Non-invasive Brain Stimulation CHI ’24, May 11–16, 2024, Honolulu, HI, USA
Figure 6: A heatmap of stimulation locations ofthe sensorimotor cortex corresponding to evoked touch sensations & movements.
here, we depict the effectiveness of each stimulation location in
creating touch or movement at nine equally separated positions
on the main axis. In defining these positions, we found that the
average unit distance between each location was 8.3 mm (SD=0.9;
min=7; max=10). This suggest that only position 2 was redundant
with 1, and the remainder were useful for haptics. Moreover, the
two nearest adjacent locations that successfully stimulated limbs
were separated by ∼17 mm (x2 average unit distance). Thisindicates
that interactive systems operating a TMS coil should maintain a
positional precision of at least ∼8.5 mm, which we used as our
design specification.
Stimulation thresholds. Finally, with respect to inducing haptic sensations by means of TMS, we investigated at what intensity
haptic effects occurred. Figure 7 shows a breakdown of the intensity
at which touch sensations and/or movement were first observed
on average. Overall, haptic effects occurred within the range of
60∼85%. Results also suggest that body parts closer to the torso consistently required higher stimulation intensities (e.g., the forearm
required more than the hand), indicating that the extremities are
easier to stimulate. Additionally, touch sensations always occurred
at lower intensities than movements, which aligns with Franza et
al’s findings on TMS studies of the hand [25].
Figure 7: A summary ofthe minimum stimulation intensities
observed to induce touch sensations & movements.
Study conclusions. Overall, our results imply that, when considering both sides of a user’s body, TMS can produce a total of
15 haptic sensations using just one actuator: touch sensations at
each of the four extremities and force feedback at eleven locations
spanning across the jaw and the four limbs. Finally, building on
our findings, we designed an interactive experience that can render
force feedback to the user’s hand, forearm, foot, and lower leg on
both sides of the body and used it to probe into experiential aspects
of our approach.
7 STUDY#2: USER’S EXPERIENCE WITH
SOURCE-EFFECTOR
This study was designed so that participants could provide qualitative feedback regarding their experience with this on-of-a-kind
device during an actual interactive use. To this end, participants
experienced a custom-design VR game that featured several sensations that our device is capable of (from Study#1). VR experience
wasfollowed by a semi-structured interview to let participants voice
their experiences. This study was approved by our Institutional
Review Board (IRB21-0055).
7.1 Apparatus, VR & Haptic Design
Apparatus. Participants wore our complete device and a VR headset (Meta Quest 2), as described in Implementation. Their hands and
feet were tracked via four HTC VIVE 3.0 Trackers attached with
Velcro-straps. Participants wore headphones (Apple Airpods Pro)
to hear the VR experience.
VR experience. Participants embodied the avatar of a cyborg
trying to escape a robotics factory that has malfunctioned, as depicted in Figure 8 (a). However, when they find the escape route
blocked by malfunctioning robots that fire at them, —as depicted
in Figure 8 (b)— the VR experience commands our haptic device
to render tactile sensation on the affected area (e.g., the left hand in
this case, but both hands and feet are possible). To advance, participants can counteract by charging up their plasma-hand and firing
plasma-projectiles to deactivate the robots—as depicted in Figure 8
(c)—when they open the palm of their hands in a firing gesture, the
VR experience detects this gesture and prompts our haptic device
to render force-feedback and tactile sensations on the firing hand
(e.g., the right hand in the case, but both hands can fire plasma
shots). After this, the user continues to counteract any robots that
appear, which can fire shots against any of the user’s VR limbs (i.e.,
the hands or feet). Figure 8 (d) shows the user being shot in their
right foot—just before this happens, the VR prompts our haptic
device to render tactile sensation on the right foot. After a while,
the user’s plasma-hand stops working, and they need to recharge
the energy. They locate a crate on the floor and stomp it with their
feet to release its charging energy—as depicted in Figure 8 (e)—just
before the stomping releases the energy, the VR commands our
haptic device to render force-feedback and tactile sensation on the
Figure 8: Full-body interactions in our Study#2, including: force-feedback and tactile sensations on both hands and both feet.
left leg. The user keeps fighting until they eventually find a button
that opens the exit door—as depicted in Figure 8 (f)—as they are
about to press it, the VR requests that our haptic device render
tactile sensation on the right hand. The user has escaped the factory.
Haptic design. Although our system has some mechanical
latency and added safety pauses (see 3.3 Safety), we tailored our
game design to overcome it. For instance, to give the coil time to
arrive at the hand (∼3.2 seconds if coming from the furthest away),
the participant hears a charging sound and sees the hand charging
before the plasma shot is fired. This is an example of how haptic
designers create VR situations to set up the user’s mental model
to handle haptic devices that include some latency (e.g., shapechanging devices [34, 90]). Another way to handle latency is to
preemptively schedule an event just before it happens, which we
leverage when the user is hit by the robots (a popular design used
in prior work, e.g., [89] or [17]). Finally, we also took advantage
of events not initiated by the user’s voluntary actions (e.g., the
appearance of the box, the start of enemy firing, spawning new
enemies, and so forth). Thus, we only triggered interactive events
with haptics after the coil was set atop the target position and/or
the completion of the five-second safety interval—a strategy known
as queueing.
7.2 Study Design
Participants. We recruited eight participants (five identified as
male, three as female, average age = 25.3 years, SD = 3.0) from
our institution; three had partaken in our first user study. All
participants were right-handed. Moreover, with the participants’
consent, we videotaped the study. Participants received $30 USD
as compensation.
Procedure. Prior to the VR trial, we calibrated the coil’s position
and the stimulation intensity to induce the visible movements of
the hand, forearm, foot, and lower leg for both sides of the body. We
adjusted the coil position with our motor structure while sending
commands to motors via GUI sliders on our Unity application. After
the calibration, the participant experienced the VR scene. Then we
conducted a semi-structured exit interview.
Interview structure. Our semi-structured interview included
four phases: (1) Overall experience: opener questions about the
overall experience with the device; (2) Open-ended feedback: we
invited participants to provide any comments regarding any aspect
of their experience in the entire study; (3) VR experience: one
question per VR interaction; (4) Future: we invited participants
to share use-case/features they would like to see. In total this
comprised eight questions. Finally, interviews were recorded in
audio (with consent) for transcription.
7.3 Results
We analyzed video-recordings from the VR experiences, depicted in
Figure 9, as well as responses to our interviews. We identified eight
unique topics: (1) surprise, (2) coil, (3) ergonomics, (4) full-body
sensations, (5) force feedback, (6) tactile feedback, (7) unexpected
sensations, and (8) future form-factors & applications.
Surprise. Six participants (out of eight) expressed surprise:
”felt like it’s actually happening. Was impressed[!]” (P5), ”very
surprising”(P2), ”surprise that it works, the location of the sensation
and motion was correct despite the device being on the head (. . .)
hard to imagine that it can work but it does[!]” (P4), and ”is on top
of your head which you wouldn’t expect to be able to move your
hands and feet. It was a little counterintuitive[!]” (P7), ” it is cool
that it is coming directly from your brain. (. . .) [no need to] attach
stuff to other parts of your body” (P6), and ”It felt natural because
there was nothing there, like using my natural hand [versus] using
a glove (. . .) bright future! (. . .) a natural feeling and doesn’t feel
like needles and there is no glue to remove at the end ” (P1).
Feeling the coil movement or coil action. Three participants
(out of eight) recalled feeling the coil’s movement: ”you can kind
of just ignore the movement, all of the feedback was unexpected.
You can’t anticipate the sensation in advance” (P4) or ”[the coil
moving] feels like it’s massaging your head, which is good!” (P6)
and ”the movement of the device could be distracting but the actual
sensations were realistic” (P8). Finally, two participants (out of
eight) commented on feeling the coil’s stimulation ”everything else
[in VR] distracted from it” (P6) and ”felt [haptics] in a specific body
area, sometimes it was covered by the sensation on the skull” (P3).
Device’s ergonomics. Three participants (out of eight) commented on ergonomics: ”a little heavy, but everything else was
fine. It was comfortable aside from the weight. It didn’t feel uncomfortable when was moving around” (P7), ”not really aware of
the moving part but was aware of the heaviness (. . .) but it is a lot
more adaptable, better than putting 10 different things on body”
(P5), ”If there is more weight on the front, it would be better” (P6).
Full-body. All eight participants recalled how they felt all sensations successfully, including tactile and forces on their hands,
feet, and arms during interactions with firing a projectile, stomping
on a box, getting shots on the hands/feet, and pressing the escape
button. For instance, ”felt sensations on the whole body, which
is very convenient. Liked how you only need to calibrate once at
Haptic Source-effector: Full-body Haptics via Non-invasive Brain Stimulation CHI ’24, May 11–16, 2024, Honolulu, HI, USA
Figure 9: Photos of participants’ experiences (reproduced with their consent): feeling the recoil of throwing a projectile (a, b);
stomping on a virtual box (c, d); feeling the impact of a projectile on the hand (e); pressing a virtual button with haptics (f).
the beginning and do not need to calibrate again” (P2; note that
recalibration could be needed depending on the situation).
Strong force feedback. Seven (out of eight) participants commented on the strength of the force feedback, for instance, ”knee
joint bounce [proceeds to make ”boom” sound], it felt strong (…)
like stomping on a rubber ball” (P2, stimulated on leg as they
stomped on the box), ”felt [a] pushback, cool!” (P1, stimulated
on hand as they fired the laser), or ”Felt very strong, maybe because it suddenly moves your foot and you need to balance back.
surprised by the attack [of the robot].” (P4, stimulated on foot), ”
really strong, like a kickback (…) kind of like a recoil”. (P7)— P1,
P4, and P8 went as far as to call the effects felt ”very natural”. The
participant who did not enjoy the haptics mentioned: ”All of the
haptic sensations made sense  [I] just didn’t like them [and
then proceeded to explain that they felt] scared of losing balance
initially [when feeling foot force feedback]” (P6).
Tactile feedback. All eight participants reported feeling tactile
sensations during the VR experience. Two participants (out of
eight) commented that these felt less expressive than the forcebased sensations, ”movement is stronger than tactile” (P2), and
”[feeling shot on hand was] less realistic than laser or stomp [both
force]” (P3).
Unexpected sensations. One participant reported a sensation
that was not force or touch, ”the [foot] sensation was very sudden
(. . .) may have contributed to the burning sensation, made me
realize I got shot” (P2). Also, one participant was surprised by the
involuntary actuation, ”kind of scary. Interesting because I am not
in control” (P1).
Future form-factors & applications. Regarding future applications beyond the VR they experienced, three participants stated,
”Learn to play instruments since hands are free (. . .) or handle
emergency situations [it] can get your attention very quickly” (P4),
”stationary mouse + keyboard games” (P2), and ”use with constant
forces, liquid, wind, etcetera” (P3). Regarding future form factors,
two participants added other ways they would like to experience
our device: ”many coil arrays so no [need for] motor movement [and later added] this could be a structure that carries the coil
without placing the weight on the user” (P2) and ”maybe move the
coil up a couple of centimeters when it is not stimulating” (P1).
In this section, we present our reflections and a potential roadmap
to further exploring this novel idea.
8.1 Roadmap for Technical Limitations
As one of the very first haptic systems making use of TMS as a centralized haptic actuator, our exploration let us engage & measure
several of its current limitations. We believe these current limitations point to significant areas for future research. It is important
to note that many in neuroscience/medicine do not push past these
limitations because, for most of their practical purposes, these are
minor issues (e.g., TMS’ audible noises are a minor nuisance during
TMS-depression therapy). We argue that incentives to push TMS
past its current form factor might have to come from outside of the
medical space. This is perhaps akin to how researchers & industry
in HCI have engineered compact & easy-to-wear EMS stimulators
when compared with medical-grade EMS devices. We argue that
the translation & exploration of TMS in interactive systems might
accelerate & motivate technical advances.
Acoustic noise. Rapidly oscillating magnetic fields create audible coil vibrations. Some advances in noise reduction are possible.
For instance, Peterchev et al. demonstrated a TMS coil that effectively reduces its noise by 19 dB—achieved by altering the coil’s
casing to shift sounds outside the user’s hearing range [67].
Coil ergonomics. TMS coils are larger than most types of nerve
stimulation (e.g., EMS). While participants in our Study#2 wore our
complete system, we believe that this heavyweight may negatively
impact experiences of prolonged use and do not recommend these.
Improving the coil’s form factor is paramount for better wearability.
One approach is altering coil geometries (e.g., single-loop coils
reduce the size by half). Another approach is using smaller
coils designed for small mammals [88], which might still be enough
for applications with weak haptics. With all these, there is a tradeoff
between size/weight and depth of the stimulation.
Stimulator size. Current TMS stimulators are still large, e.g.,
ours measures 46×38×31 cm. This is because, to produce strong
magnetic fields, the capacitor arrays require large power (4600 W
at peak—approximately the energy intake of two hairdryers). At
the current stage, we recommend TMS tethered to the stimulator,
where the user might be free to move around, but limited to the
range of the cable. Despite this, advances in engineering are likely
to improve this. For instance, Sauvage et al. designed a compact
TMS (11×27×29 cm) at 9 kg, which operates on a small 24 V DC
power supply and exhibits an output of 700 mT at 1 Hz (i.e.,
70% of our stimulator’s maximum output).
Alternative mechanical designs. We do not think of our headworn implementation as the only way to realize source-haptics
using TMS. To minimize weight, researchers might explore mounting the coil and the actuation system to the user’s chair (e.g., desktop/sited applications) or suspending them via the ceiling (e.g.,
similar to early VR setups that were heavy, or large free-moving
VR arenas). Alternatively, if the stimulation points are predefined
for a given application, one could replace the robotic actuators with
a fixed mount. Particularly, for single-point stimulation, a coil on a
helmet could reduce weight. For multi-point stimulation, a helmet with multiple fixed coils might also be beneficial. All these
non-motorized approaches also eliminate the latency associated
with our approach’s mechanical actuation of the coil. However,
this comes at the cost of stimulation resolution, which is limited by
the coil’s size (e.g., 5 cm steps in vs. our <8.5 mm steps via our
actuators).
Limited sensations. While we confirmed that our approach
can create a total of 15 haptic sensations including both force &
touch, it still has limitations. For instance, the spatial resolution
of haptic feedback via TMS is influenced by the size of the coil’s
focal point (e.g., ∼1 cm radius with the butterfly coil we used).
While this can be smaller than ∼5 mm by optimizing the coil geometry, one has to note that a smaller focal point is a tradeoff
to the stimulation depth. This poses challenges in rendering focused tactile cues in small skin areas, e.g., multiple tactile
points on the fingerpad. At this stage, this is not possible with
existing non-invasive stimulation techniques such as TMS (and,
instead, necessitates turning to invasive intracortical stimulation). However, it is important to note that the upper bound of
TMS’ spatial resolution is yet to be fully understood (see 8.2 Stimuli
design and understanding). Additionally, by limiting the stimulation
duration (see 3.3 Safety), our force sensations are impact-like (i.e.,
applied for a short duration) and not sustained forces. Also, as
previously discussed, our touch sensations are less prominent than
forces due to the difficulties in stimulating somatosensory neurons,
compared to motor neurons.
Now that we have discussed the challenges brought by our specific
implementation using TMS, we turn our attention back to the wider
concept of a centralized haptic actuator worn by the user (i.e., a
source-effector).
Closing the loop. One possible reason why we observed some
of our limitations (e.g., fewer points for touch sensations, or even
less strength for touch than forces) might be related to the lack
of a closed-loop system. In other words, during calibration, it is
easy to accurately determine if a force occurred (i.e., it causes a
visible contraction of a muscle) but the same cannot be said for
touch. One way that future researchers might tackle this is by
attempting to close the loop on the stimulation. This might be done
by first scanning participants via MRI to obtain a more precise map
of regions that should be stimulated for this particular participant.
Stimuli design and understanding. While our system can
create 15 distinct haptic sensations, this observation is specific
to our current actuation resolution (8.5 mm). We hope that our
findings facilitate exploration of the upper bound of how many
different points across the body TMS can deliver haptics. Possible
strategies for this include defining finer grids for coil positioning
or implementing the aforementioned MRI-based approach to accurately identify cortical regions. Moreover, broadening the range of
haptic sensations—such as different textures or even pressure—is
also a promising avenue for future research. One way to approach
this is to explore different TMS pulse parameters (e.g., pulse width,
frequency, and waveform) and evaluate elicited sensations
through psychophysics studies, akin to methods employed in the
domain of surface electrical stimulation.
Beyond TMS. Finally, we hope our work inspires new implementations of this concept of a source-effector. One promising avenue
is via the aforementioned transcranial ultrasound stimulation—
despite its still nascent status, it might offer some avenue to mitigate the size of the TMS coils. However, its accuracy & limitations
are still being understood.
CONCLUSION
We proposed, implemented & evaluated a novel concept for haptics
in which one centralized on-body haptic actuator renders haptic effects on multiple body parts—we called this a haptic source-effector.
We implement it by leveraging transcranial magnetic stimulation
(TMS). We can render touch/force-feedback in hands, arms, legs,
feet, and jaw—without needing to instrument these with individual
actuators—which we validated in our first user study. In the sourceeffector, a single magnetic coil moves mechanically across the scalp.
For instance, if the user is meant to feel haptics in their hand, the
coil is moved and stimulates the area of their sensorimotor cortex
where hand sensations are processed. In our second user study,
we probed into participants’ experiences while using our haptic
display in an interactive VR experience.
Finally, as a first implementation of TMS-based haptics, we thoroughly discussed its limitations and proposed a roadmap to further
its use in interactive contexts.
